



Produced by Julia Miller and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive/American Libraries.)





Transcriber's Note

Obvious typographical errors have been corrected. A list of corrections
is found at the end of the text. Oe ligatures have been expanded.




[Illustration: MONKEY IN CHURCH. Page 88.]


[Illustration: MINNIE and her PETS.
  BY MRS MADELINE LESLIE.
  MINNIE'S PET MONKEY.]




                       MINNIE'S PET MONKEY.


                               BY

                      MRS. MADELINE LESLIE,
  AUTHOR OF "THE LESLIE STORIES," "TIM, THE SCISSORS-GRINDER,"
                              ETC.


                          ILLUSTRATED.


                             BOSTON:
                        LEE AND SHEPARD,
              SUCCESSORS TO PHILLIPS, SAMPSON & CO.
                             1864.




Entered, according to Act of Congress, in the year 1863, by

A. R. BAKER,

In the Clerk's Office of the District Court of the District of
Massachusetts.

ELECTROTYPED AT THE BOSTON STEREOTYPE FOUNDRY.




                    TO MY YOUNG FRIEND,

                  HENRY FOWLE DURANT, JR.

                  =These Little Volumes=

               ARE AFFECTIONATELY INSCRIBED

                      BY THE AUTHOR,

  IN THE EARNEST HOPE THAT THEY MAY INCREASE IN HIM THAT
      LOVE OF NATURE AND OF RURAL LIFE WHICH HAS EVER
          EXERTED SO SALUTARY AN INFLUENCE IN THE
              FORMATION OF THE CHARACTERS OF
                    THE WISE AND GOOD.




MINNIE AND HER PETS.

  Minnie's Pet Parrot.
  Minnie's Pet Cat.
  Minnie's Pet Dog.
  Minnie's Pet Horse.
  Minnie's Pet Lamb.
  Minnie's Pet Monkey.




MINNIE'S PET MONKEY.




CHAPTER I.

JACKO AND HIS WOUNDED TAIL.


Did you ever see a monkey? If you have not, I suppose you will like to
hear a description of Jacko, Minnie's sixth pet.

He was about eighteen inches high, with long arms, covered with short
hair, which he used as handily as a boy, flexible fingers, with flat
nails, and a long tail, covered with hair, which seemed to answer the
purpose of a third hand.

Though monkeys are usually very ugly and unpleasant, from their
approaching so nearly to the human face, and still bearing so strongly
the marks of the mere brute, yet Jacko was a pretty little fellow.

He had bright eyes, which sparkled like diamonds from beneath his
deep-set eyebrows. His teeth were of the most pearly whiteness, and he
made a constant display of them, grinning and chattering continually.
But I ought to tell you about his passage in uncle Frank's ship.

On one of Captain Lee's voyages, he touched upon the coast of Africa,
where he saw the little fellow in a hen-coop, just about to be carried
on board a whaler. The gentleman had often thought he should like to
carry his favorite niece a little pet; but as she already had a parrot,
he did not know what she would wish.

But when he listened to the chattering of the monkey, and heard the
sailor who owned him say what a funny little animal it was, he thought
he would buy it and take it home to her.

On the voyage, Jacko met with a sad accident. The hen-coop in which he
was confined was too small to contain the whole of his tail, and he was
obliged, when he slept, to let the end of it hang out. This was a great
affliction to the poor animal, for he was very proud of his tail, which
was indeed quite an addition to his good looks.

It so happened that there were two large cats on board ship; and one
night, as they were prowling about, they saw the tail hanging out while
Jacko was sound asleep; and before he had time to move, one of them
seized it and bit it off.

The monkey was very indignant, and if he could have had a fair chance at
his enemies, would have soon punished them for their impudence. It was
really amusing to see him afterward. He would pull his bleeding tail in
through the bars of the hen-coop, and give it a malicious bite, as much
as to say,--

"I wish you were off. You are of no use to me now; and you look terribly
short."

When they reached New York, at the end of their voyage, Captain Lee took
Jacko out of the hen-coop, and put him in a bag, which was carried into
the depot while he was purchasing his ticket. The monkey, who must needs
see every thing that was going on, suddenly poked his head out of the
bag, and gave a malicious grin at the ticket-master.

The man was much frightened, but presently recovered himself, and
returned the insult by saying,--

"Sir, that's a dog! It's the rule that no dog can go in the cars without
being paid for."

It was all in vain that the captain tried to convince him that Jacko
was not a dog, but a monkey. He even took him out of the bag; but in the
face of this evidence, the man would persist in saying,--

"He is a dog, and must have a ticket before he enters the cars."

So a ticket was bought, and Jacko was allowed to proceed on his journey.

The little fellow was as pleased as the captain when he arrived at the
end of his journey, and took possession of his pleasant quarters in the
shed adjoining Mr. Lee's fine house. He soon grew fond of his little
mistress, and played all manner of tricks, jumping up and down, swinging
with his tail, which had begun to heal, and chattering with all his
might in his efforts to please her.

Mr. Lee, at the suggestion of his brother, the captain, had a nice
house or cage made for Minnie's new pet, into which he could be put if
he became troublesome, and where he always went to sleep. The rest of
the time he was allowed his liberty, as far as his chain would reach.

Jacko came from a very warm climate, and therefore often suffered from
the cold in the northern latitude to which he had been brought.

Mrs. Lee could not endure to see a monkey dressed like a man, as they
sometimes are in shows. She said they looked disgustingly; but she
consented that the little fellow should have a tight red jacket, and
some drawers, to keep him comfortable. Minnie, too, begged from her some
old pieces of carpeting, to make him a bed, when Jacko seemed greatly
delighted. He did not now, as before, often stand in the morning
shaking, and blue with the cold, but laughed, and chattered, and showed
his gratitude in every possible way.

Not many months after Jacko came, and when he had become well acquainted
with all the family, Fidelle had a family of kittens, which she often
carried in her mouth back and forth through the shed. The very sight of
these little animals seemed to excite Jacko exceedingly. He would
spring the entire length of his chain, trying to reach them.

One day, when the kittens had begun to run alone, and were getting to be
very playful, the cook heard a great noise in the shed, and Fidelle
crying with all her might. She ran to see what was the matter, and, to
her surprise, found Jacko sitting up in the cage, grinning with delight,
while he held one of the kittens in his arms, hugging it as if it had
been a baby.

Cook knew the sight would please Minnie, and she ran to call her. But
the child sympathized too deeply in Fidelle's distress to enjoy it. She
tried to get the kitten away from Jacko, but he had no idea of giving it
up, until at last, when Mrs. Lee, who had come to the rescue, gave him a
piece of cake, of which he was very fond, he relaxed his hold, and she
instantly released the poor, frightened little animal.

Fidelle took warning by this occurrence, and never ventured through the
shed again with her babies, though Jacko might seem to be sound asleep
in his cage.

Jacko had been at Mr. Lee's more than a year before they knew him to
break his chain and run about by himself. The first visit he made was to
Leo, in the barn, and he liked it so well that, somehow or other, he
contrived to repeat the visit quite as often as it was agreeable to the
dog, who never could endure him.

After this, he became very mischievous, so that every one of the
servants, though they often had a great laugh at his tricks, would have
been glad to have the little fellow carried back to his home in Africa.

I don't think even Minnie loved her pet monkey as well as she did her
other pets. She could not take him in her arms as she did Fidelle and
Tiney, nor play with him as she did with Nannie and her lamb, and he
could not carry her on his back, as Star did.

"Well," she said, one day, after discussing the merits of her animals
with her mamma, "Poll talks to me, and Jacko makes me laugh; but if I
should have to give up one of my pets, I had rather it would be the
monkey."




CHAPTER II.

JACKO BLACKING THE TABLE.


One morning, cook went to her mistress with loud complaints of Jacko's
tricks.

"What has he been doing now?" inquired the lady, with some anxiety.

"All kinds of mischief, ma'am. If I didn't like you, and the master, and
Miss Minnie so well, I wouldn't be living in the same house with a
monkey, no ways."

Here the woman, having relieved her mind, began to relate Jacko's new
offence, and soon was joining heartily in the laugh her story caused her
mistress.

"Since the trickish fellow found the way to undo his chain, ma'am, he
watches every thing that is done in the kitchen. Yesterday I polished
the range, and the door to the oven. I suppose he saw me at work, and
thought it would be good fun; for when I was out of the kitchen hanging
some towels to dry on the line, in he walks to the closet where I keep
the blacking and brushes, and what should he do but black the table and
chairs? Such a sight, ma'am, as would make your eyes cry to see. It'll
take me half the forenoon to clean them."

"I think you will have to take a little stick, Hepsy," said Mrs. Lee,
smiling, "and whip him when he does mischief."

"Indeed, ma'am, and it's little strength I'd have left me to do the
cooking if I gave him half the whippings he deserves; besides, I'd be
sure to get the cratur's ill will; and they say that's unlucky for any
one."

"What does she mean, mamma, by its being unlucky?" inquired Minnie, when
the cook had returned to her work in the kitchen.

"I can't say, my dear. You know Hepsy has some strange ideas which she
brought with her from Ireland. It may be she has heard of the
superstitious reverence some nations have for the monkey."

"O, mamma, will you please tell me about it?"

"I have read that in many parts of India, monkeys are made objects of
worship; and splendid temples are dedicated to their honor.

"At one time, when the Portuguese plundered the Island of Ceylon, they
found, in one of the temples dedicated to these animals, a small golden
casket containing the tooth of a monkey. This was held in such
estimation by the natives, that they offered nearly a million of dollars
to redeem it. But the viceroy, thinking it would be a salutary
punishment to them, ordered it to be burned.

"Some years after, a Portuguese, having obtained a similar tooth,
pretended that he had recovered the old one, which so rejoiced the
priests that they purchased it from him for more than fifty thousand
dollars."

Minnie laughed. "I should suppose," she said, "that if cook thinks so
much of monkeys, she would be pleased to live with them. Do you know
any more about monkeys, mamma?"

"I confess, my dear, that monkeys have never been among my favorites.
There are a great many kinds, but all are mischievous, troublesome, and
thievish. The dispositions of some of them are extremely bad, while
others are so mild and tractable as to be readily tamed and taught a
great variety of tricks. They live together in large groups, leaping
with surprising agility from tree to tree. Travellers say it is very
amusing to listen to the chattering of these animals, which they compare
to the shouting of a grand cavalcade, all speaking together, and yet
seeming perfectly to understand one another.

"In the countries of the Eastern Peninsula, where they abound, the
matrons are often observed, in the cool of the evening, sitting in a
circle round their little ones, which amuse themselves with their
various gambols. The merriment of the young, as they jump over each
other's heads, and wrestle in sport, is most ludicrously contrasted with
the gravity of their seniors, who are secretly delighted with the fun,
but far too dignified to let it appear.

"But when any foolish little one behaves ill, the mamma will be seen to
jump into the throng, seize the juvenile by the tail, take it over her
knee, and give it a good whipping."

"O, how very funny, mamma! I wonder whether Jacko was treated so. Will
you please tell me more? I do like to hear about monkeys."

"If you will bring me that book from the library next the one about
cats, perhaps I can find some anecdotes to read to you."

The little girl clapped her hands with delight, and running gayly to the
next room, soon returned with the book, when her mother read as
follows:--

"A family in England had a pet monkey. On one occasion, the footman
retired to his room to shave himself, without noticing that the animal
had followed him. The little fellow watched him closely during the
process, and noticed where the man put his razor and brush.

"No sooner had the footman left the room, than the monkey slyly took the
razor, and, mounting on a chair opposite the small mirror, began to
scrape away at his throat, as he had seen the man do; but alas! not
understanding the nature of the instrument he was using, the poor
creature cut so deep a gash, that he bled profusely. He was found in
the situation described, with the razor still in his fingers, but
unfortunately was too far gone to be recovered, and soon died, leaving a
caution to his fellows against playing with edged tools."

"I hope Jacko will never see any body shave," said Minnie, in a
faltering voice.

"Here is a funny story, my dear, about a monkey in the West Indies. The
little fellow was kept tied to a stake in the open air, and was
frequently deprived of his food by the Johnny Crows. He tried to drive
them off, but without success, and at last made the following plan for
punishing the thieves.

"Perceiving a flock of these birds coming toward him one day just after
his food had been brought, he lay down near his stake, and pretended to
be dead. For some time, he lay perfectly motionless, when the birds,
really deceived, approached by degrees, and got near enough to steal his
food, which he allowed them to do. This game he repeated several times,
till they became so bold as to come within reach of his claws, when he
suddenly sprang up and caught his victim in his firm grasp. Death was
not his plan of punishment. He wished to make a man of him, according
to the ancient definition, 'a biped without feathers,' and therefore,
plucking the crow neatly, he let him go to show himself to his
companions. This proved so effectual a punishment, that he was
afterwards left to eat his food in peace."

"I don't see," said Minnie, thoughtfully, "how a monkey could ever think
of such a way."

"It certainly does show a great deal of sagacity," responded the lady,
"and a great deal of cunning in carrying out his plan."

"I hope there are ever so many anecdotes, mamma."

Mrs. Lee turned over the leaves. "Yes, my dear," she said, cheerfully,
"there are quite a number; some of them seem to be very amusing, but I
have only time to read you one more to-day."

"Dr. Guthrie gives an amusing account of a monkey named Jack.

"Seeing his master and friends drinking whiskey with great apparent
relish, he took the opportunity, when he thought he was unseen, to empty
their half-filled glasses; and while they were roaring with laughter, he
began to hop, skip, and jump. Poor Jack was drunk.

"The next day, his master wanted to repeat the experiment, but found
Jack had not recovered from the effects of his dissipation. He commanded
him to come to the table; but the poor fellow put his hand to his head,
and not all their endeavors could induce him to taste another drop all
his life.

"Jack became a thorough teetotaller."




CHAPTER III.

JACKO RUNNING AWAY.


Minnie had a cousin Frank, the son of Mr. Harry Lee. He was three years
older than Minnie, and was full of life and frolic.

At one time he came to visit Minnie; and fine fun indeed they had with
the pets, the monkey being his especial favorite.

Every day some new experiment was to be tried with Jacko, who, as Frank
declared, could be taught any thing that they wished. One time, he took
the little fellow by the chain for a walk, Minnie gayly running by his
side, and wondering what her cousin was going to do.

On their way to the barn, they met Leo, who at once began to bark
furiously.

"That will never do, my brave fellow," exclaimed the boy; "for we want
you to turn horse, and take Jacko to ride."

"O, Frank! Leo will kill him. Don't do that!" urged Minnie, almost
crying.

"But I mean to make them good friends," responded the lad. "Here, you
take hold of the chain, and I will coax the dog to be quiet while I put
Jacko on his back."

This was not so easy as he had supposed; for no amount of coaxing or
flattery would induce Leo to be impressed into this service. He hated
the monkey, and was greatly disgusted at his appearance as he hopped,
first on Frank's shoulder, and then to the ground, his head sticking out
of his little red jacket, and his face wearing a malicious grin.

Finding they could not succeed in this, they went into the stable to
visit Star, when, with a quick motion, Jacko twitched the chain from
Minnie's hand, and running up the rack above the manger, began to laugh
and chatter in great glee.

His tail, which had now fully healed, was of great use to him on this
occasion, when, to Minnie's great surprise, he clung with it to the bar
of the rack, and began to swing himself about.

[Illustration: JACKO RUNNING AWAY. Page 52.]

"I heard of a monkey once," exclaimed Frank, laughing merrily, "who made
great use of his tail. If a nut or apple were thrown to him which fell
beyond his reach, he would run to the full length of his chain, turn his
back, then stretch out his tail, and draw toward him the coveted
delicacy."

"Let's see whether Jacko would do so," shouted Minnie, greatly excited
with the project.

"When we can catch him. But see how funny he looks. There he goes up the
hay mow, the chain dangling after him."

"If we don't try to catch him, he'll come quicker," said Minnie,
gravely.

"I know another story about a monkey--a real funny one," added the boy.
"I don't know what his name was; but he used to sleep in the barn with
the cattle and horses. I suppose monkeys are always cold here; at any
rate, this one was; and when he saw the hostler give the horse a nice
feed of hay, he said to himself, 'What a comfortable bed that would make
for me!'

"When the man went away, he jumped into the hay and hid, and every time
the horse came near enough to eat, he sprang forward and bit her ears
with his sharp teeth.

"Of course, as the poor horse couldn't get her food, she grew very thin,
and at last was so frightened that the hostler could scarcely get her
into the stall. Several times he had to whip her before she would enter
it, and then she stood as far back as possible, trembling like a leaf.

"It was a long time before they found out what the matter was; and then
the monkey had to take a whipping, I guess."

"If his mother had been there, she would have whipped him," said Minnie,
laughing.

"What do you mean?"

The little girl then repeated what her mother had told her of the
discipline among monkeys, at which he was greatly amused.

All this time, they were standing at the bottom of the hay mow, and
supposed that Jacko was safe at the top; but the little fellow was more
cunning than they thought. He found the window open near the roof, where
hay was sometimes pitched in, and ran down into the yard as quick as
lightning.

The first they knew of it was when John called out from the barnyard,
"Jacko, Jacko! Soh, Jacko! Be quiet, sir!"

It was a wearisome chase they had for the next hour, and at the end they
could not catch the runaway; but at last, when they sat down calmly in
the house, he stole back to his cage, and lay there quiet as a lamb.

Minnie's face was flushed with her unusual exercise, but in a few
minutes she grew very pale, until her mother became alarmed. After a few
drops of lavender, however, she said she felt better, and that if Frank
would tell her a story she should be quite well.

"That I will," exclaimed the boy, eagerly. "I know a real funny one;
you like funny stories--don't you?"

"Yes, when they're true," answered Minnie.

"Well, this is really true. A man was hunting, and he happened to kill a
monkey that had a little baby on her back. The little one clung so close
to her dead mother, that they could scarcely get it away. When they
reached the gentleman's house, the poor creature began to cry at
finding itself alone. All at once it ran across the room to a block,
where a wig belonging to the hunter's father was placed, and thinking
that was its mother, was so comforted that it lay down and went to
sleep.

"They fed it with goat's milk, and it grew quite contented, for three
weeks clinging to the wig with great affection.

"The gentleman had a large and valuable collection of insects, which
were dried upon pins, and placed in a room appropriated to such
purposes.

"One day, when the monkey had become so familiar as to be a favorite
with all in the family, he found his way to this apartment, and made a
hearty breakfast on the insects.

"The owner, entering when the meal was almost concluded, was greatly
enraged, and was about to chastise the animal, who had so quickly
destroyed the work of years, when he saw that the act had brought its
own punishment. In eating the insects, the animal had swallowed the
pins, which very soon caused him such agony that he died."

"I don't call the last part funny at all," said Minnie, gravely.

"But wasn't it queer for it to think the wig was its mother?" asked the
boy, with a merry laugh. "I don't think it could have had much sense to
do that."

"But it was only a baby monkey then, Harry."

"How did it happen," inquired Mrs. Lee, "that Jacko got away from you?"

"He watched his chance, aunty, and twitched the chain away from Minnie.
Now he's done it once, he'll try the game again, I suppose, he is so
fond of playing us tricks."

And true enough, the very next morning the lady was surprised at a visit
from the monkey in her chamber, where he made himself very much at home,
pulling open drawers, and turning over the contents, in the hope of
finding some confectionery, of which he was extremely fond.

"Really," she exclaimed to her husband, "if Jacko goes on so, I shall
be of cook's mind, and not wish to live in the house with him."




CHAPTER IV.

THE MONKEY IN CHURCH.


One day, Jacko observed nurse washing out some fine clothes for her
mistress, and seemed greatly interested in the suds which she made in
the progress of her work.

Watching his chance, he went to Mrs. Lee's room while the family were at
breakfast one morning, and finding some nice toilet soap on the marble
washstand, began to rub it on some fine lace lying on the bureau. After
a little exertion, he was delighted to find that he had a bowl full of
nice, perfumed suds, and was chattering to himself in great glee, when
Ann came in and spoiled his sport.

"You good for nothing, mischievous creature," she cried out, in sudden
wrath, "I'll cure you of prowling about the house in this style."
Giving him a cuff across his head with a shoe, "Go back to your cage,
where you belong."

"Jacko is really getting to be very troublesome," remarked the lady to
her husband. "I can't tell how much longer my patience with him will
last."

"Would Minnie mourn very much if she were to lose him?" asked Mr. Lee.

"I suppose she would for a time; but then she has so many pets to take
up her attention."

Just then the child ran in, her eyes filled with tears, exclaiming,--

"Father, does Jacko know any better? Is he to blame for trying to wash?"

Mr. Lee laughed.

"Because," she went on, "I found him crouched down in his cage, looking
very sorry; and nurse says he ought to be ashamed of himself, cutting
up such ridiculous capers."

"I dare say he feels rather guilty," remarked Mr. Lee. "He must be
taught better, or your mother will be tired of him."

When her father had gone to the city, Minnie looked so grave that her
mother, to comfort her, took the book and read her some stories. A few
of them I will repeat to you.

"A lady was returning from India, in a ship on board of which there was
a monkey. She was a very mild, gentle creature, and readily learned any
thing that was taught her. When she went to lie down at night, she made
up her bed in imitation of her mistress, then got in and wrapped herself
up neatly with the quilt. Sometimes she would wrap her head with a
handkerchief.

"When she did wrong, she would kneel and clasp her hands, seeming
earnestly to ask to be forgiven."

"That's a good story, mamma."

"Yes, dear; and here is another."

"A gentleman boarding with his wife at a hotel in Paris had a pet
monkey, who was very polite. One day his master met him going down
stairs; and when the gentleman said 'good morning,' the animal took off
his cap and made a very polite bow.

"'Are you going away?' asked the owner. 'Where is your passport?' Upon
this the monkey held out a square piece of paper.

"'See!' said the gentleman; 'your mistress' gown is dusty.'

"Jack instantly took a small brush from his master's pocket, raised the
hem of the lady's dress, cleaned it, and then did the same to his
master's shoes, which were also dusty.

"When they gave him any thing to eat, he did not cram his pouches with
it, but delicately and tidily devoured it; and when, as frequently
occurred, strangers gave him money, he always put it in his master's
hands."

"Do you think, mamma, I could teach Jacko to do so?" inquired Minnie,
eagerly.

"I can't say, my dear; and indeed I think it would be hardly worth the
pains to spend a great deal of time in teaching him. He seems to learn
quite fast enough by himself. Indeed, he is so full of tricks, and so
troublesome to cook in hiding her kitchen utensils, I am afraid we shall
have to put him in close confinement."

"I had rather uncle Frank would carry him back to Africa," sighed the
child. "He would be so unhappy."

"Well, dear, I wouldn't grieve about it now. We must manage somehow till
uncle Frank comes, and then perhaps he can tell us what to do. Now I'll
read you another story."

"A monkey living with a gentleman in the country became so troublesome
that the servants were constantly complaining."

"That seems similar to our case," said the lady, smiling, as she
interrupted the reading.

"One day, having his offers of assistance rudely repulsed, he went into
the next house by a window in the second story, which was unfortunately
open. Here he pulled out a small drawer, where the lady kept ribbons,
laces, and handkerchiefs, and putting them in a foot-tub, rubbed away
vigorously for an hour, with all the soap and water there were to be
found in the room.

"When the lady returned to the chamber, he was busily engaged in
spreading the torn and disfigured remnants to dry.

"He knew well enough he was doing wrong; for, without her speaking to
him, he made off quickly and ran home, where he hid himself in the case
of the large kitchen clock.

"The servants at once knew he had been in mischief, as this was his
place of refuge when he was in disgrace.

"One day he watched the cook while she was preparing some partridges for
dinner, and concluded that all birds ought to be so treated. He soon
managed to get into the yard, where his mistress kept a few pet bantam
fowls, and, after eating their eggs, he secured one of the hens, and
began plucking it. The noise of the poor bird called some of the
servants to the rescue, when they found the half-plucked creature in
such a pitiable condition that they killed it at once. After this, Mr.
Monkey was chained up, and soon died."

Minnie looked very grave after hearing this story, and presently said,
"I wonder how old that monkey was."

"The book does not mention his age, my dear. Why?"

"I was thinking that perhaps, as Jacko grows older, he may learn better;
and then I said to myself, 'That one must have been young.'"

"If a monkey is really inclined to be vicious, he is almost unbearable,"
remarked the lady. "His company does not begin to compensate for the
trouble he makes. Sometimes he is only cunning, but otherwise mild and
tractable."

"And which, mamma, do you think Jacko is?"

"I have always thought, until lately, that he was one of the better
kind; but I have now a good many doubts whether you enjoy her funny
tricks enough to compensate cook for all the mischief she does. If I
knew any one who wanted a pet monkey, and would treat him kindly, I
should be glad to have him go. I should hate to have him killed."

"Killed!" screamed Minnie, with a look of horror; "O, mamma, I wouldn't
have one of my pets killed for any thing."

Mrs. Lee thought that would probably be at some time Nannie's fate, but
she wisely said nothing.

"Please read more, mamma. I don't want to think about such awful
things."

The lady cast her eyes over the page, and laughed heartily. Presently
she said, "Here is a very curious anecdote, which I will read you; but
first I must explain to you what a sounding-board is.

"In old fashioned churches, there used to hang, directly over the
pulpit, a large, round board, like the top of a table, which, it was
thought, assisted the minister's voice to be heard by all the
congregation. I can remember, when I was a child, going to visit my
grandmother, and accompanying her to church, where there was a
sounding-board. I worried, through the whole service, for fear it would
fall on the minister's head and kill him. But I will read."

"There was once an eminent clergyman by the name of Casaubon, who kept
in his family a tame monkey, of which he was very fond. This animal,
which was allowed its liberty, liked to follow the minister, when he
went out, but on the Sabbath was usually shut up till his owner was out
of sight, on his way to church.

"But one Sabbath morning, when the clergyman, taking his sermon under
his arm, went out, the monkey followed him unobserved, and watching the
opportunity while his master was speaking to a gentleman on the steps,
ran up at the back of the pulpit, and jumped upon the sounding-board.

"Here he gravely seated himself, looking round in a knowing manner on
the congregation, who were greatly amused at so strange a spectacle.

"The services proceeded as usual, while the monkey, who evidently much
enjoyed the sight of so many people, occasionally peeped over the
sounding-board, to observe the movements of his master, who was
unconscious of his presence.

"When the sermon commenced, many little forms were convulsed with
laughter, which conduct so shocked the good pastor, that he thought it
his duty to administer a reproof, which he did with considerable action
of his hands and arms.

"The monkey, who had now become familiar with the scene, imitated every
motion, until at last a scarcely suppressed smile appeared upon the
countenance of most of the audience. This occurred, too, in one of the
most solemn passages in the discourse; and so horrible did the levity
appear to the good minister, that he launched forth into violent rebuke,
every word being enforced by great energy of action.

"All this time, the little fellow overhead mimicked every movement with
ardor and exactness.

"The audience, witnessing this apparent competition between the good man
and his monkey, could no longer retain the least appearance of
composure, and burst into roars of laughter, in the midst of which one
of the congregation kindly relieved the horror of the pastor at the
irreverence and impiety of his flock, by pointing out the cause of the
merriment.

"Casting his eyes upward, the minister could just discern the animal
standing on the end of the sounding-board, and gesturing with all his
might, when he found it difficult to control himself, though highly
exasperated at the occurrence. He gave directions to have the monkey
removed, and sat down to compose himself, and allow his congregation to
recover their equanimity while the order was being obeyed."




CHAPTER V.

JACKO IN THE PANTRY.


In his frequent visits to the stable, Jacko amused himself by catching
mice that crept out to pick up the corn.

The servants, having noticed his skill, thought they would turn it to
good account, and having been troubled with mice in the pantry,
determined to take advantage of the absence of Mrs. Lee on a journey,
and shut the monkey up in it. So, one evening, they took him out of his
comfortable bed, and chained him up in the larder, having removed every
thing except some jam pots, which they thought out of his reach, and
well secured with bladder stretched over the top.

Poor Jacko was evidently much astonished, and quite indignant, at this
treatment, but presently consoled himself by jumping into a soup
tureen, where he fell sound asleep, while the mice scampered all over
the place.

As soon as it was dawn, the mice retired to their holes. Jacko awoke
shivering with cold, stretched himself, and then, pushing the soup
tureen from the shelf, broke it to pieces. After this achievement, he
began to look about for something to eat, when he spied the jam pots on
the upper shelf.

"There is something good," he thought, smelling them. "I'll see."

His sharp teeth soon worked an entrance, when the treasured jams, plums,
raspberry, strawberry, candied apricots, the pride and care of the cook,
disappeared in an unaccountably short time.

At last, his appetite for sweets was satisfied, and coiling his tail in
a corner, he lay quietly awaiting the servant's coming to take him out.

Presently he heard the door cautiously open, when the chamber girl gave
a scream of horror as she saw the elegant China dish broken into a
thousand bits, and lying scattered on the floor.

She ran in haste to summon Hepsy and the nurse, her heart misgiving her
that this was not the end of the calamity. They easily removed Jacko,
who began already to experience the sad effects of overloading his
stomach, and then found, with alarm and grief, the damage he had done.

For several days the monkey did not recover from the effects of his
excess. He was never shut up again in the pantry.

When Mrs. Lee returned she blamed the servants for trying such an
experiment in her absence. Jacko was now well, and ready for some new
mischief; and Minnie, who heard a ludicrous account of the story,
laughed till she cried.

She repeated it, in great glee, to her father, who looked very grave as
he said, "We think a sea voyage would do the troublesome fellow good;
but you shall have a Canary or a pair of Java sparrows instead."

"Don't you know any stories of good monkeys, father?"

"I don't recollect any at this moment, my dear; but I will see whether I
can find any for you."

He opened the book, and then asked,--

"Did you know, Minnie, that almost all monkeys have bags or pouches in
their cheeks, the skin of which is loose, and when empty makes the
animal look wrinkled?"

"No, sir; I never heard about it."

"Yes, that is the case. He puts his food in them, and keeps it there
till he wishes to devour it.

"There are some kinds, too, that have what is called prehensile tails;
that is, tails by which they can hang themselves to the limb of a tree,
and which they use with nearly as much ease as they can their hands. The
facility which this affords them for moving about quickly among the
branches of trees is astonishing. The firmness of the grasp which it
makes is very surprising; for if it winds a single coil around a branch,
it is quite sufficient, not only to support its weight, but to enable it
to swing in such a manner as to gain a fresh hold with its feet."

"I'm sure, father," eagerly cried Minnie, "that Jacko has a prehensile
tail, for I have often seen him swing from the ladder which goes up the
hay mow."

"I dare say, child. He seems to be up to every thing. But here is an
account of an Indian monkey, of a light grayish yellow color, with black
hands and feet. The face is black, with a violet tinge. This is called
Hoonuman, and is much venerated by the Hindoos. They believe it to be
one of the animals into which the souls of their friends pass at death.
If one of these monkeys is killed, the murderer is instantly put to
death; and, thus protected, they become a great nuisance, and destroy
great quantities of fruit. But in South America, monkeys are killed by
the natives as game, for the sake of the flesh. Absolute necessity alone
would compel us to eat them. A great naturalist named Humboldt tells us
that their manner of cooking them is especially disgusting. They are
raised a foot from the ground, and bent into a sitting position, in
which they greatly resemble a child, and are roasted in that manner. A
hand and arm of a monkey, roasted in this way, are exhibited in a museum
in Paris."

"Monkeys have a curious way of introducing their tails into the fissures
or hollows of trees, for the purpose of hooking out eggs and other
substances. On approaching a spot where there is a supply of food, they
do not alight at once, but take a survey of the neighborhood, a general
cry being kept up by the party."




CHAPTER VI.

THE CRUEL MONKEY.


One afternoon, Minnie ran out of breath to the parlor. "Mamma," she
exclaimed, "cook says monkeys are real cruel in their families. Is it
true?"

The lady smiled. "I suppose, my dear," she responded, "that there is a
difference of disposition among them. I have heard that they are very
fond of their young, and that, when threatened with danger, they mount
them on their back, or clasp them to their breast with great affection.

"But I saw lately an anecdote of the cruelty of a monkey to his wife,
and if I can find the book, I will read it to you."

"There is an animal called the fair monkey, which, though the most
beautiful of its tribe, is gloomy and cruel. One of these, which, from
its extreme beauty and apparent gentleness, was allowed to ramble at
liberty over a ship, soon became a great favorite with the crew, and in
order to make him perfectly happy, as they imagined, they procured him a
wife.

"For some weeks, he was a devoted husband, and showed her every
attention and respect. He then grew cool, and began to use her with much
cruelty. His treatment made her wretched and dull.

"One day, the crew noticed that he treated her with more kindness than
usual, but did not suspect the wicked scheme he had in mind. At last,
after winning her favor anew, he persuaded her to go aloft with him, and
drew her attention to an object in the distance, when he suddenly gave
her a push, which threw her into the sea.

"This cruel act seemed to afford him much gratification, for he
descended in high spirits."

"I should think they would have punished him," said Minnie, with great
indignation.

"Perhaps they did, love. At any rate, it proves that beauty is by no
means always to be depended upon."

Mrs. Lee then took her sewing, but Minnie plead so earnestly for one
more story, a good long one, that her mother, who loved to gratify her,
complied, and read the account which I shall give you in closing this
chapter on Minnie's pet monkey.

"A gentleman, returning from India, brought a monkey, which he presented
to his wife. She called it Sprite, and soon became very fond of it.

"Sprite was very fond of beetles, and also of spiders, and his mistress
used sometimes to hold his chain, lengthened by a string, and make him
run up the curtains, and clear out the cobwebs for the housekeeper.

"On one occasion, he watched his opportunity, and snatching the chain,
ran off, and was soon seated on the top of a cottage, grinning and
chattering to the assembled crowd of schoolboys, as much as to say,
'Catch me if you can.' He got the whole town in an uproar, but finally
leaped over every thing, dragging his chain after him, and nestled
himself in his own bed, where he lay with his eyes closed, his mouth
open, his sides ready to burst with his running.

"Another time, the little fellow got loose, but remembering his former
experience, only stole into the shed, where he tried his hand at
cleaning knives. He did not succeed very well in this, however, for the
handle was the part he attempted to polish, and, cutting his fingers, he
relinquished the sport.

"Resolved not to be defeated, he next set to work to clean the shoes and
boots, a row of which were awaiting the boy. But Sprite, not remembering
all the steps of the performance, first covered the entire shoe, sole
and all, with the blacking, and then emptied the rest of the Day &
Martin into it, nearly filling it with the precious fluid. His coat was
a nice mess for some days after.

"One morning, when the servants returned to the kitchen, they found
Sprite had taken all the kitchen candlesticks out of the cupboard, and
arranged them on the fender, as he had once seen done. As soon as he
heard the servants returning, he ran to his basket, and tried to look as
though nothing had happened.

"Sprite was exceedingly fond of a bath. Occasionally a bowl of water was
given him, when he would cunningly try the temperature by putting in his
finger, after which he gradually stepped in, first one foot, then the
other, till he was comfortably seated. Then he took the soap and rubbed
himself all over. Having made a dreadful splashing all around, he jumped
out and ran to the fire, shivering. If any body laughed at him during
this performance, he made threatening gestures, chattering with all his
might to show his displeasure, and sometimes he splashed water all over
them.

"Poor Sprite one day nearly committed suicide. As he was brought from a
very warm climate, he often suffered exceedingly, in winter, from the
cold.

"The cooking was done by a large fire on the open hearth, and as his
basket, where he slept, was in one corner of the kitchen, before morning
he frequently awoke shivering and blue. The cook was in the habit of
making the fire, and then returning to her room to finish her toilet.

"One morning, having lighted the pile of kindlings as usual, she hung on
the tea-kettle and went out, shutting the door carefully behind her.

"Sprite thought this a fine opportunity to warm himself. He jumped from
his basket, ran to the hearth, and took the lid of the kettle off.
Cautiously touching the water with the tip of his finger, he found it
just the right heat for a bath, and sprang in, sitting down, leaving
only his head above the water.

"This he found exceedingly comfortable for a time; but soon the water
began to grow hot. He rose, but the air outside was so cold, he quickly
sat down again. He did this several times, and would, no doubt, have
been boiled to death, and become a martyr to his own want of pluck and
firmness in action, had it not been for the timely return of the cook,
who, seeing him sitting there almost lifeless, seized him by the head
and pulled him out.

"He was rolled in blankets, and laid in his basket, where he soon
recovered, and, it is to be hoped, learned a lesson from this hot
experience, not to take a bath when the water is on the fire."




CHAPTER VII.

KEES STEALING EGGS.


When Minnie was nine years of age, she accompanied her parents to a
menagerie, and there, among other animals, she saw a baboon. She was
greatly excited by his curious, uncouth manoeuvres, asking twenty
questions about him, without giving her father time to answer. On their
way home, she inquired,--

"Are baboons one kind of monkeys, father?"

"Yes, my daughter; and a more disagreeable, disgusting animal I cannot
conceive of."

"I hope you are not wishing for a baboon to add to your pets," added her
mother, laughing.

"I don't believe Jacko would get along with that great fellow at all,"
answered the child. "But, father, will you please tell me something
more about the curious animals?"

The conversation was here interrupted by seeing that a carriage had
stopped just in front of their own, and that quite a crowd had gathered
about some person who seemed to be hurt.

Minnie's sympathies were alive in an instant. She begged her father to
get out, as possibly he might be of some use.

The driver stopped of his own accord, and inquired what had happened,
and then they saw that it was a spaniel that was hurt. He had been in
the road, and not getting out of the way quick enough, the wheel had
gone over his body.

The young lady who was in the buggy was greatly distressed, from which
Minnie argued that she was kind to animals, and that they should like
her.

The owner of the dog held the poor creature in her arms, though it
seemed to be in convulsions, and wept bitterly as she found it must die.

Mr. Lee, to please his little daughter, waited a few minutes; but he
found her getting so much excited over the suffering animal, he gave
John orders to proceed.

During the rest of the drive, she could talk of nothing else, wondering
whether the spaniel was alive now, or whether the young man in the buggy
paid for hurting it.

The next day, however, having made up her mind that the poor creature
must be dead, and his sufferings ended, and having given Tiney many
admonitions to keep out of the road when carriages were passing, her
thoughts turned once more to the baboon.

Mr. Lee found in his library a book which gave a short account of the
animal, which he read to her.

"The baboon is of the monkey tribe, notwithstanding its long, dog-like
head, flat, compressed cheeks, and strong and projecting teeth. The form
and position of the eyes, combined with the similarity of the arms and
hands, give to these creatures a resemblance to humanity as striking as
it is disgusting."

"Then follows an account," the gentleman went on, "of the peculiarities
of different kinds of baboons, which you would not understand."

"But can't you tell me something about them yourself, father?"

"I know very little about the creatures, my dear; but I have read that
they are exceedingly strong, and of a fiery, vicious temper.

"They can never be wholly tamed, and it is only while restraint of the
severest kind is used, that they can be governed at all. If left to
their own will, their savage nature resumes its sway, and their actions
are cruel, destructive, and disgusting."

"I saw the man at the menagerie giving them apples," said Minnie; "but
he did not give them any meat all the time I was there."

"No; they subsist exclusively on fruits, seeds, and other vegetable
matter. In the countries where they live, especially near the Cape of
Good Hope, the inhabitants chase them with dogs and guns in order to
destroy them, on account of the ravages they commit in the fields and
gardens. It is said that they make a very obstinate resistance to the
dogs, and often have fierce battles with them; but they greatly fear the
gun.

"As the baboon grows older, instead of becoming better, his rage
increases, so that the slightest cause will provoke him to terrible
fury."

"Is that all you know about them?"

"Why, Minnie, in order to satisfy you, any one must become a walking
encyclopaedia. What other question have you to ask?"

"Why, they must have something to eat, and how are they to get it unless
they go into gardens?"

Mr. Lee laughed aloud. "I rather think I should soon convince them they
were not to enter my garden," he said, emphatically. "But seriously,
they descend in vast numbers upon the orchards of fruit, destroying, in
a few hours, the work of months, or even of years. In these excursions,
they move on a concerted plan, placing sentinels on commanding spots, to
give notice of the approach of an enemy. As soon as he perceives danger,
the sentinel gives a loud yell, and then the whole troop rush away with
the greatest speed, cramming the fruit which they have gathered into
their cheek pouches."

Minnie looked so much disappointed when he ceased speaking, that her
mother said, "I read somewhere an account of a baboon that was named
Kees, who was the best of his kind that I ever heard of."

"Yes, that was quite an interesting story, if you can call it to mind,"
said the gentleman, rising.

"It was in a book of travels in Africa," the lady went on. "The
traveller, whose name was Le Vaillant, took Kees through all his
journey, and the creature really made himself very useful. As a
sentinel, he was better than any of the dogs. Indeed, so quick was his
sense of danger, that he often gave notice of the approach of beasts of
prey, when every thing was apparently secure.

"There was another way in which Kees made himself useful. Whenever they
came across any fruits or roots with which the Hottentots were
unacquainted, they waited to see whether Kees would taste them. If he
threw them down, the traveller concluded they were poisonous or
disagreeable, and left them untasted.

"Le Vaillant used to hunt, and frequently took Kees with him on these
excursions. The poor fellow understood the preparations making for the
sport, and when his master signified his consent that he should go, he
showed his joy in the most lively manner. On the way, he would dance
about, and then run up into the trees to search for gum, of which he was
very fond.

"I recall one amusing trick of Kees," said the lady, laughing, "which
pleased me much when I read it. He sometimes found honey in the hollows
of trees, and also a kind of root of which he was very fond, both of
which his master insisted on sharing with him. On such occasions, he
would run away with his treasure, or hide it in his pouches, or eat it
as fast as possible, before Le Vaillant could have time to reach him.

"These roots were very difficult to pull from the ground. Kees' manner
of doing it was this. He would seize the top of the root with his strong
teeth, and then, planting himself firmly against the sod, drew himself
gradually back, which forced it from the earth. If it proved stubborn,
while he still held it in his teeth he threw himself heels over head,
which gave such a concussion to the root that it never failed to come
out.

"Another habit that Kees had was very curious. He sometimes grew tired
with the long marches, and then he would jump on the back of one of the
dogs, and oblige it to carry him whole hours. At last the dogs grew
weary of this, and one of them determined not to be pressed into
service. He now adopted an ingenious artifice. As soon as Kees leaped on
his back, he stood still, and let the train pass without moving from the
spot. Kees sat quiet, determined that the dog should carry him, until
the party were almost out of sight, and then they both ran in great
haste to overtake their master.

"Kees established a kind of authority over the dogs. They were
accustomed to his voice, and in general obeyed without hesitation the
slightest motions by which he communicated his orders, taking their
places about the tent or carriage, as he directed them. If any of them
came too near him when he was eating, he gave them a box on the ear,
and thus compelled them to retire to a respectful distance."

"Why, mother, I think Kees was a very good animal, indeed," said Minnie,
with considerable warmth.

"I have told you the best traits of his character," she answered,
smiling. "He was, greatly to his master's sorrow, an incurable thief. He
could not be left alone for a moment with any kind of food. He
understood perfectly how to loose the strings of a basket, or to take
the cork from a bottle. He was very fond of milk, and would drink it
whenever he had a chance. He was whipped repeatedly for these
misdemeanors, but the punishment did him no good.

"Le Vaillant was accustomed to have eggs for his breakfast; but his
servants complained one morning there were none to be had. Whenever any
thing was amiss, the fault was always laid to Kees, who, indeed,
generally deserved it. The gentleman determined to watch him.

"The next morning, hearing the cackling of a hen, he started for the
place; but found Kees had been before him, and nothing remained but the
broken shell. Having caught him in his pilfering, his master gave him a
severe beating; but he was soon at his old habit again, and the
gentleman was obliged to train one of his dogs to run for the egg as
soon as it was laid, before he could enjoy his favorite repast.

"One day, Le Vaillant was eating his dinner, when he heard the voice of
a bird, with which he was not acquainted. Leaving the beans he had
carefully prepared for himself on his plate, he seized his gun, and ran
out of the tent. In a short time he returned, with the bird in his hand,
but found not a bean left, and Kees missing.

"When he had been stealing, the baboon often staid out of sight for some
hours; but, this time, he hid himself for several days. They searched
every where for him, but in vain, till his master feared he had really
deserted them. On the third day, one of the men, who had gone to a
distance for water, saw him hiding in a tree. Le Vaillant went out and
spoke to him, but he knew he had deserved punishment, and he would not
come down; so that, at last, his master had to go up the tree and take
him."

"And was he whipped, mother?"

"No; he was forgiven that time, as he seemed so penitent. There is only
one thing more I can remember about him. An officer who was visiting Le
Vaillant, wishing to try the affection of the baboon for his master,
pretended to strike him. Kees flew into a violent rage, and from that
time could never endure the sight of the officer. If he only saw him at
a distance, he ground his teeth, and used every endeavor to fly at him;
and had he not been chained, he would speedily have revenged the
insult."

       *       *       *       *       *

    "Nature is man's best teacher. She unfolds
    Her treasures to his search, unseals his eye,
    Illumes his mind, and purifies his heart,--
    An influence breathes from all the sights and sounds
    Of her existence; she is wisdom's self."

       *       *       *       *       *

    "There's not a plant that springeth
      But bears some good to earth;
    There's not a life but bringeth
      Its store of harmless mirth;
    The dusty wayside clover
      Has honey in her cells,--
    The wild bee, humming over,
      Her tale of pleasure tells.
    The osiers, o'er the fountain,
      Keep cool the water's breast,
    And on the roughest mountain
      The softest moss is pressed.
    Thus holy Nature teaches
      The worth of blessings small;
    That Love pervades, and reaches,
      And forms the bliss of all."





MRS. LESLIE'S JUVENILE SERIES.

16mo.

FOR BOYS.

  Vol.   I. THE MOTHERLESS CHILDREN.
   "    II. PLAY AND STUDY.
   "   III. HOWARD AND HIS TEACHER.
   "    IV. JACK, THE CHIMNEY SWEEPER.

FOR GIRLS.

  Vol.   I. TRYING TO BE USEFUL.
   "    II. LITTLE AGNES.
   "   III. I'LL TRY.
   "    IV. ART AND ARTLESSNESS.




                         MINNIE'S PET CAT.


                               BY

                      MRS. MADELINE LESLIE,
  AUTHOR OF "THE LESLIE STORIES," "TIM, THE SCISSORS-GRINDER,"
                              ETC.


                          ILLUSTRATED.


                             BOSTON:
                        LEE AND SHEPARD,
              SUCCESSORS TO PHILLIPS, SAMPSON & CO.
                             1864.




                       MINNIE'S PET PARROT.


                               BY

                      MRS. MADELINE LESLIE,
  AUTHOR OF "THE LESLIE STORIES," "TIM, THE SCISSORS-GRINDER,"
                              ETC.


                          ILLUSTRATED.


                             BOSTON:
                        LEE AND SHEPARD,
              SUCCESSORS TO PHILLIPS, SAMPSON & CO.
                             1864.




                         MINNIE'S PET DOG.


                               BY

                      MRS. MADELINE LESLIE,
  AUTHOR OF "THE LESLIE STORIES," "TIM, THE SCISSORS-GRINDER,"
                              ETC.


                          ILLUSTRATED.


                             BOSTON:
                        LEE AND SHEPARD,
              SUCCESSORS TO PHILLIPS, SAMPSON & CO.
                             1864.




                        MINNIE'S PET LAMB.


                               BY

                      MRS. MADELINE LESLIE,
  AUTHOR OF "THE LESLIE STORIES," "TIM, THE SCISSORS-GRINDER,"
                              ETC.


                          ILLUSTRATED.


                             BOSTON:
                        LEE AND SHEPARD,
              SUCCESSORS TO PHILLIPS, SAMPSON & CO.
                             1864.




                       MINNIE'S PET HORSE.


                               BY

                      MRS. MADELINE LESLIE,
  AUTHOR OF "THE LESLIE STORIES," "TIM, THE SCISSORS-GRINDER,"
                              ETC.


                          ILLUSTRATED.


                             BOSTON:
                        LEE AND SHEPARD,
              SUCCESSORS TO PHILLIPS, SAMPSON & CO.
                             1864.




Transcriber's Note

The following typographical errors were corrected:

Page  Error
73    "good morning," changed to 'good morning,'
112   pet monkey." changed to pet monkey.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Minnie's Pet Monkey, by Madeline Leslie

*** 