



Produced by David Widger





               THE DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS M.A.  F.R.S.

            CLERK OF THE ACTS AND SECRETARY TO THE ADMIRALTY

    TRANSCRIBED FROM THE SHORTHAND MANUSCRIPT IN THE PEPYSIAN LIBRARY
 MAGDALENE COLLEGE CAMBRIDGE BY THE REV. MYNORS BRIGHT M.A. LATE FELLOW
                      AND PRESIDENT OF THE COLLEGE

                              (Unabridged)

                      WITH LORD BRAYBROOKE'S NOTES

                        EDITED WITH ADDITIONS BY

                        HENRY B. WHEATLEY F.S.A.

                          DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS.
                           JUNE, JULY & AUGUST
                                   1661

June 1st.  Having taken our leaves of Sir W. Batten and my Lady, who are
gone this morning to keep their Whitsuntide, Sir W. Pen and I and Mr.
Gauden by water to Woolwich, and there went from ship to ship to give
order for and take notice of their forwardness to go forth, and then to
Deptford and did the like, having dined at Woolwich with Captain Poole at
the tavern there.  From Deptford we walked to Redriffe, calling at the
half-way house, and there come into a room where there was infinite of new
cakes placed that are made against Whitsuntide, and there we were very
merry.  By water home, and there did businesses of the office. Among
others got my Lord's imprest of L1000 and Mr. Creed's of L10,000 against
this voyage their bills signed.  Having wrote letters into the country and
read some things I went to bed.

2nd (Whitsunday).  The barber having done with me, I went to church, and
there heard a good sermon of Mr. Mills, fit for the day.  Then home to
dinner, and then to church again, and going home I found Greatorex (whom I
expected today at dinner) come to see me, and so he and I in my chamber
drinking of wine and eating of anchovies an hour or two, discoursing of
many things in mathematics, and among others he showed me how it comes to
pass the strength that levers have, and he showed me that what is got as
to matter of strength is lost by them as to matter of time.  It rained
very hard, as it hath done of late so much that we begin to doubt a
famine, and so he was forced to stay longer than I desired.  At night
after prayers to bed.

3rd.  To the Wardrobe, where discoursing with my Lord, he did instruct me
as to the business of the Wardrobe, in case, in his absence, Mr. Townsend
should die, and told me that he do intend to joyne me and Mr. Moore with
him as to the business, now he is going to sea, and spoke to me many other
things, as to one that he do put the greatest confidence in, of which I am
proud.  Here I had a good occasion to tell him (what I have had long in my
mind) that, since it has pleased God to bless me with something, I am
desirous to lay out something for my father, and so have pitched upon Mr.
Young's place in the Wardrobe, which I desired he would give order in his
absence, if the place should fall that I might have the refusal.  Which my
Lord did freely promise me, at which I was very glad, he saying that he
would do that at the least.  So I saw my Lord into the barge going to
Whitehall, and I and Mr. Creed home to my house, whither my father and my
cozen Scott came to dine with me, and so we dined together very well, and
before we had done in comes my father Bowyer and my mother and four
daughters, and a young gentleman and his sister, their friends, and there
staid all the afternoon, which cost me great store of wine, and were very
merry.  By and by I am called to the office, and there staid a little.  So
home again, and took Mr. Creed and left them, and so he and I to the
Towre, to speak for some ammunition for ships for my Lord; and so he and
I, with much pleasure, walked quite round the Towre, which I never did
before.  So home, and after a walk with my wife upon the leads, I and she
went to bed.  This morning I and Dr. Peirce went over to the Beare at the
Bridge foot, thinking to have met my Lord Hinchinbroke and his brother
setting forth for France; but they being not come we went over to the
Wardrobe, and there found that my Lord Abbot Montagu being not at Paris,
my Lord hath a mind to have them stay a little longer before they go.

4th.  The Comptroller came this morning to get me to go see a house or two
near our office, which he would take for himself or Mr. Turner, and then
he would have me have Mr. Turner's lodgings and himself mine and Mr.
Davis's.  But the houses did not like us, and so that design at present is
stopped.  Then he and I by water to the bridge, and then walked over the
Bank-side till we came to the Temple, and so I went over and to my
father's, where I met with my cozen J. Holcroft, and took him and my
father and my brother Tom to the Bear tavern and gave them wine, my cozen
being to go into the country again to-morrow.  From thence to my Lord
Crew's to dinner with him, and had very good discourse about having of
young noblemen and gentlemen to think of going to sea, as being as
honourable service as the land war.  And among other things he told us
how, in Queen Elizabeth's time, one young nobleman would wait with a
trencher at the back of another till he came to age himself.  And
witnessed in my young Lord of Kent, that then was, who waited upon my Lord
Bedford at table, when a letter came to my Lord Bedford that the Earldom
of Kent was fallen to his servant, the young Lord; and so he rose from
table, and made him sit down in his place, and took a lower for himself,
for so he was by place to sit.  From thence to the Theatre and saw "Harry
the 4th," a good play.  That done I went over the water and walked over
the fields to Southwark, and so home and to my lute.  At night to bed.

5th.  This morning did give my wife L4 to lay out upon lace and other
things for herself.  I to Wardrobe and so to Whitehall and Westminster,
where I dined with my Lord and Ned Dickering alone at his lodgings. After
dinner to the office, where we sat and did business, and Sir W. Pen and I
went home with Sir R. Slingsby to bowls in his ally, and there had good
sport, and afterwards went in and drank and talked.  So home Sir William
and I, and it being very hot weather I took my flageolette and played upon
the leads in the garden, where Sir W. Pen came out in his shirt into his
leads, and there we staid talking and singing, and drinking great drafts
of claret, and eating botargo

     ["Botarga.  The roe of the mullet pressed flat and dried; that of
     commerce, however, is from the tunny, a large fish of passage which
     is common in the Mediterranean.  The best kind comes from Tunis."
     --Smyth's Sailor's Word-Book.  Botargo was chiefly used to promote
     drinking by causing thirst, and Rabelais makes Gargantua eat it.]

and bread and butter till 12 at night, it being moonshine; and so to bed,
very near fuddled.

6th.  My head hath aked all night, and all this morning, with my last
night's debauch.  Called up this morning by Lieutenant Lambert, who is now
made Captain of the Norwich, and he and I went down by water to Greenwich,
in our way observing and discoursing upon the things of a ship, he telling
me all I asked him, which was of good use to me.  There we went and eat
and drank and heard musique at the Globe, and saw the simple motion that
is there of a woman with a rod in her hand keeping time to the musique
while it plays, which is simple, methinks.  Back again by water, calling
at Captain Lambert's house, which is very handsome and neat, and a fine
prospect at top.  So to the office, where we sat a little, and then the
Captain and I again to Bridewell to Mr. Holland's, where his wife also, a
plain dowdy, and his mother was.  Here I paid Mrs. Holland the money due
from me to her husband.  Here came two young gentlewomen to see Mr.
Holland, and one of them could play pretty well upon the viallin, but,
good God! how these ignorant people did cry her up for it!  We were very
merry.  I staid and supped there, and so home and to bed.  The weather
very hot, this night I left off my wastecoat.

7th.  To my Lord's at Whitehall, but not finding him I went to the
Wardrobe and there dined with my Lady, and was very kindly treated by her.
After dinner to the office, and there till late at night.  So home, and to
Sir William Batten's, who is come this day from Chatham with my Lady, who
is and has been much troubled with the toothache.  Here I staid till late,
and so home and to bed.

8th.  To Whitehall to my Lord, who did tell me that he would have me go to
Mr. Townsend, whom he had ordered to discover to me the whole mystery of
the Wardrobe, and none else but me, and that he will make me deputy with
him for fear that he should die in my Lord's absence, of which I was glad.
Then to the Cook's with Mr. Shepley and Mr. Creed, and dined together, and
then I went to the Theatre and there saw Bartholomew Faire, the first time
it was acted now a-days.  It is a most admirable play and well acted, but
too much prophane and abusive.  From thence, meeting Mr. Creed at the
door, he and I went to the tobacco shop under Temple Bar gate, and there
went up to the top of the house and there sat drinking Lambeth ale a good
while.  Then away home, and in my way called upon Mr. Rawlinson (my uncle
Wight being out of town), for his advice to answer a letter of my uncle
Robert, wherein he do offer me a purchase to lay some money upon, that
joynes upon some of his own lands, and plainly telling me that the reason
of his advice is the convenience that it will give me as to his estate, of
which I am exceeding glad, and am advised to give up wholly the disposal
of my money to him, let him do what he will with it, which I shall do.  So
home and to bed.

9th (Lord's day).  This day my wife put on her black silk gown, which is
now laced all over with black gimp lace, as the fashion is, in which she
is very pretty.  She and I walked to my Lady's at the Wardrobe, and there
dined and was exceeding much made of.  After dinner I left my wife there,
and I walked to Whitehall, and then went to Mr. Pierce's and sat with his
wife a good while (who continues very pretty) till he came, and then he
and I, and Mr. Symons (dancing master), that goes to sea with my Lord, to
the Swan tavern, and there drank, and so again to White Hall, and there
met with Dean Fuller, and walked a great while with him; among other
things discoursed of the liberty the Bishop (by name the of Galloway)
takes to admit into orders any body that will; among others, Roundtree, a
simple mechanique that was a person [parson ?] formerly in the fleet. He
told me he would complain of it.  By and by we went and got a sculler, and
landing him at Worcester House, I and W. Howe, who came to us at
Whitehall, went to the Wardrobe, where I met with Mr. Townsend, who is
very willing he says to communicate anything for my Lord's advantage to me
as to his business.  I went up to Jane Shore's towre, and there W. Howe
and I sang, and so took my wife and walked home, and so to bed. After I
came home a messenger came from my Lord to bid me come to him tomorrow
morning.

10th.  Early to my Lord's, who privately told me how the King had made him
Embassador in the bringing over the Queen.

     [Katherine of Braganza, daughter of John IV. of Portugal, born 1638,
     married to Charles II., May 21st, 1662.  After the death of the king
     she lived for some time at Somerset House, and then returned to
     Portugal, of which country she became Regent in 1704 on the
     retirement of her brother Don Pedro.  She died December 31st, 1705.]

That he is to go to Algier, &c., to settle the business, and to put the
fleet in order there; and so to come back to Lisbone with three ships, and
there to meet the fleet that is to follow him.  He sent for me, to tell me
that he do intrust me with the seeing of all things done in his absence as
to this great preparation, as I shall receive orders from my Lord
Chancellor and Mr. Edward Montagu.  At all which my heart is above measure
glad; for my Lord's honour, and some profit to myself, I hope. By and by,
out with Mr. Shepley Walden, Parliament-man for Huntingdon, Rolt,
Mackworth, and Alderman Backwell, to a house hard by, to drink Lambeth
ale.  So I back to the Wardrobe, and there found my Lord going to Trinity
House, this being the solemn day of choosing Master, and my Lord is
chosen, so he dines there to-day.  I staid and dined with my Lady; but
after we were set, comes in some persons of condition, and so the children
and I rose and dined by ourselves, all the children and I, and were very
merry and they mighty fond of me.  Then to the office, and there sat
awhile.  So home and at night to bed, where we lay in Sir R. Slingsby's
lodgings in the dining room there in one green bed, my house being now in
its last work of painting and whiting.

11th.  At the office this morning, Sir G. Carteret with us; and we agreed
upon a letter to the Duke of York, to tell him the sad condition of this
office for want of money; how men are not able to serve us more without
some money; and that now the credit of the office is brought so low, that
none will sell us any thing without our personal security given for the
same.  All the afternoon abroad about several businesses, and at night
home and to bed.

12th.  Wednesday, a day kept between a fast and a feast, the Bishops not
being ready enough to keep the fast for foul weather before fair weather
came; and so they were forced to keep it between both.

     [A Form of Prayer was published to be used in London on the 12th,
     and in the country on the 19th of June, being the special days
     appointed for a general fast to be kept in the respective places for
     averting those sicknesses and diseases, that dearth and scarcity,
     which justly may be feared from the late immoderate rain and waters:
     for a thanksgiving also for the blessed change of weather; and the
     begging the continuance of it to us for our comfort: And likewise
     for beseeching a Blessing upon the High Court of Parliament now
     assembled: Set forth by his Majesty's authority.  A sermon was
     preached before the Commons by Thomas Greenfield, preacher of
     Lincoln's Inn.  The Lords taxed themselves for the poor--an earl,
     30s., a baron, 20s.  Those absent from prayers were to pay a
     forfeit.--B.]

I to Whitehall, and there with Captain Rolt and Ferrers we went to Lambeth
to drink our morning draft, where at the Three Mariners, a place noted for
their ale, we went and staid awhile very merry, and so away. And wanting a
boat, we found Captain Bun going down the river, and so we went into his
boat having a lady with him, and he landed them at Westminster and me at
the Bridge.  At home all day with my workmen, and doing several things,
among others writing the letter resolved of yesterday to the Duke.  Then
to White Hall, where I met my Lord, who told me he must have L300 laid out
in cloth, to give in Barbary, as presents among the Turks.  At which
occasion of getting something I was very glad. Home to supper, and then to
Sir R. Slingsby, who with his brother and I went to my Lord's at the
Wardrobe, and there staid a great while, but he being now taking his leave
of his friends staid out late, and so they went away.  Anon came my Lord
in, and I staid with him a good while, and then to bed with Mr. Moore in
his chamber.

13th.  I went up and down to Alderman Backwell's, but his servants not
being up, I went home and put on my gray cloth suit and faced white coat,
made of one of my wife's pettycoates, the first time I have had it on, and
so in a riding garb back again and spoke with Mr. Shaw at the Alderman's,
who offers me L300 if my Lord pleases to buy this cloth with, which
pleased me well.  So to the Wardrobe and got my Lord to order Mr. Creed to
imprest so much upon me to be paid by Alderman Backwell.  So with my Lord
to Whitehall by water, and he having taken leave of the King, comes to us
at his lodgings and from thence goes to the garden stairs and there takes
barge, and at the stairs was met by Sir R. Slingsby, who there took his
leave of my Lord, and I heard my Lord thank him for his kindness to me,
which Sir Robert answered much to my advantage.  I went down with my Lord
in the barge to Deptford, and there went on board the Dutch yacht and
staid there a good while, W. Howe not being come with my Lord's things,
which made my Lord very angry.  By and by he comes and so we set sayle,
and anon went to dinner, my Lord and we very merry; and after dinner I
went down below and there sang, and took leave of W. Howe, Captain Rolt,
and the rest of my friends, then went up and took leave of my Lord, who
give me his hand and parted with great respect.  So went and Captain
Ferrers with me into our wherry, and my Lord did give five guns, all they
had charged, which was the greatest respect my Lord could do me, and of
which I was not a little proud.  So with a sad and merry heart I left them
sailing pleasantly from Erith, hoping to be in the Downs tomorrow early.
We toward London in our boat. Pulled off our stockings and bathed our legs
a great while in the river, which I had not done some years before.  By
and by we come to Greenwich, and thinking to have gone on the King's
yacht, the King was in her, so we passed by, and at Woolwich went on
shore, in the company of Captain Poole of Jamaica and young Mr.
Kennersley, and many others, and so to the tavern where we drank a great
deal both wine and beer.  So we parted hence and went home with Mr.
Falconer, who did give us cherrys and good wine.  So to boat, and young
Poole took us on board the Charity and gave us wine there, with which I
had full enough, and so to our wherry again, and there fell asleep till I
came almost to the Tower, and there the Captain and I parted, and I home
and with wine enough in my head, went to bed.

14th.  To Whitehall to my Lord's, where I found Mr. Edward Montagu and his
family come to lie during my Lord's absence.  I sent to my house by my
Lord's order his shipp--[Qy.  glass omitted after shipp.]--and triangle
virginall.  So to my father's, and did give him order about the buying of
this cloth to send to my Lord.  But I could not stay with him myself, for
having got a great cold by my playing the fool in the water yesterday I
was in great pain, and so went home by coach to bed, and went not to the
office at all, and by keeping myself warm, I broke wind and so came to
some ease.  Rose and eat some supper, and so to bed again.

15th.  My father came and drank his morning draft with me, and sat with me
till I was ready, and so he and I about the business of the cloth.  By and
by I left him and went and dined with my Lady, who, now my Lord is gone,
is come to her poor housekeeping again.  Then to my father's, who tells me
what he has done, and we resolved upon two pieces of scarlet, two of
purple, and two of black, and L50 in linen.  I home, taking L300 with me
home from Alderman Backwell's.  After writing to my Lord to let him know
what I had done I was going to bed, but there coming the purser of the
King's yacht for victualls presently, for the Duke of York is to go down
to-morrow, I got him to promise stowage for these things there, and so I
went to bed, bidding Will go and fetch the things from the carrier's
hither, which about 12 o'clock were brought to my house and laid there all
night.

16th (Lord's day).  But no purser coming in the morning for them, and I
hear that the Duke went last night, and so I am at a great loss what to
do; and so this day (though the Lord's day) staid at home, sending Will up
and down to know what to do.  Sometimes thinking to continue my resolution
of sending by the carrier to be at Deal on Wednesday next, sometimes to
send them by sea by a vessel on purpose, but am not yet come to a
resolution, but am at a very great loss and trouble in mind what in the
world to do herein.  The afternoon (while Will was abroad) I spent in
reading "The Spanish Gypsey," a play not very good, though commended much.
At night resolved to hire a Margate Hoy, who would go away to-morrow
morning, which I did, and sent the things all by him, and put them on
board about 12 this night, hoping to have them as the wind now serves in
the Downs to-morrow night.  To-bed with some quiet of mind, having sent
the things away.

17th.  Visited this morning by my old friend Mr. Ch. Carter, who staid and
went to Westminster with me, and there we parted, and I to the Wardrobe
and dined with my Lady.  So home to my painters, who are now about
painting my stairs.  So to the office, and at night we all went to Sir W.
Pen's, and there sat and drank till 11 at night, and so home and to bed.

18th.  All this morning at home vexing about the delay of my painters, and
about four in the afternoon my wife and I by water to Captain Lambert's,
where we took great pleasure in their turret-garden, and seeing the fine
needle-works of his wife, the best I ever saw in my life, and afterwards
had a very handsome treat and good musique that she made upon the
harpsicon, and with a great deal of pleasure staid till 8 at night, and so
home again, there being a little pretty witty child that is kept in their
house that would not let us go without her, and so fell a-crying by the
water-side.  So home, where I met Jack Cole, who staid with me a good
while, and is still of the old good humour that we were of at school
together, and I am very glad to see him.  He gone, I went to bed.

19th.  All the morning almost at home, seeing my stairs finished by the
painters, which pleases me well.  So with Mr. Moore to Westminster Hall,
it being term, and then by water to the Wardrobe, where very merry, and so
home to the office all the afternoon, and at night to the Exchange to my
uncle Wight about my intention of purchasing at Brampton.  So back again
home and at night to bed.  Thanks be to God I am very well again of my
late pain, and to-morrow hope to be out of my pain of dirt and trouble in
my house, of which I am now become very weary.  One thing I must observe
here while I think of it, that I am now become the most negligent man in
the world as to matters of news, insomuch that, now-a-days, I neither can
tell any, nor ask any of others.

20th.  At home the greatest part of the day to see my workmen make an end,
which this night they did to my great content.

21st.  This morning going to my father's I met him, and so he and I went
and drank our morning draft at the Samson in Paul's Churchyard, and eat
some gammon of bacon, &c., and then parted, having bought some green
Say--[A woollen cloth.  "Saye clothe serge."--Palsgrave.]--for curtains in
my parler.  Home, and so to the Exchequer, where I met with my uncle
Wight, and home with him to dinner, where among others (my aunt being out
of town), Mr. Norbury and I did discourse of his wife's house and land at
Brampton, which I find too much for me to buy.  Home, and in the afternoon
to the office, and much pleased at night to see my house begin to be clean
after all the dirt.

22nd.  Abroad all the morning about several businesses.  At noon went and
dined with my Lord Crew, where very much made of by him and his lady. Then
to the Theatre, "The Alchymist,"--[Comedy by Ben Jonson, first printed in
1612.]--which is a most incomparable play.  And that being done I met with
little Luellin and Blirton, who took me to a friend's of theirs in
Lincoln's Inn fields, one Mr. Hodges, where we drank great store of
Rhenish wine and were very merry.  So I went home, where I found my house
now very clean, which was great content to me.

23rd (Lord's day).  In the morning to church, and my wife not being well,
I went with Sir W. Batten home to dinner, my Lady being out of town, where
there was Sir W. Pen, Captain Allen and his daughter Rebecca, and Mr.
Hempson and his wife.  After dinner to church all of us and had a very
good sermon of a stranger, and so I and the young company to walk first to
Graye's Inn Walks, where great store of gallants, but above all the ladies
that I there saw, or ever did see, Mrs. Frances Butler (Monsieur
L'Impertinent's sister) is the greatest beauty.  Then we went to
Islington, where at the great house I entertained them as well as I could,
and so home with them, and so to my own home and to bed.  Pall, who went
this day to a child's christening of Kate Joyce's, staid out all night at
my father's, she not being well.

24th (Midsummer-day).  We kept this a holiday, and so went not to the
office at all.  All the morning at home.  At noon my father came to see my
house now it is done, which is now very neat.  He and I and Dr. Williams
(who is come to see my wife, whose soare belly is now grown dangerous as
she thinks) to the ordinary over against the Exchange, where we dined and
had great wrangling with the master of the house when the reckoning was
brought to us, he setting down exceeding high every thing. I home again
and to Sir W. Batten's, and there sat a good while.  So home.

25th.  Up this morning to put my papers in order that are come from my
Lord's, so that now I have nothing there remaining that is mine, which I
have had till now.  This morning came Mr. Goodgroome

     [Theodore Goodgroome, Pepys's singing-master.  He was probably
     related to John Goodgroome, a Gentleman of the Chapel Royal, who is
     also referred to in the Diary.]

to me (recommended by Mr. Mage), with whom I agreed presently to give him
20s. entrance, which I then did, and 20s. a month more to teach me to
sing, and so we began, and I hope I have come to something in it.  His
first song is "La cruda la bella."  He gone my brother Tom comes, with
whom I made even with my father and the two drapers for the cloths I sent
to sea lately.  At home all day, in the afternoon came Captain Allen and
his daughter Rebecca and Mr. Hempson, and by and by both Sir Williams, who
sat with me till it was late, and I had a very gallant collation for them.
At night to bed.

26th.  To Westminster about several businesses, then to dine with my Lady
at the Wardrobe, taking Dean Fuller along with me; then home, where I
heard my father had been to find me about special business; so I took
coach and went to him, and found by a letter to him from my aunt that my
uncle Robert is taken with a dizziness in his head, so that they desire my
father to come down to look after his business, by which we guess that he
is very ill, and so my father do think to go to-morrow.  And so God's will
be done.  Back by water to the office, there till night, and so home to my
musique and then to bed.

27th.  To my father's, and with him to Mr. Starling's to drink our morning
draft, and there I told him how I would have him speak to my uncle Robert,
when he comes thither, concerning my buying of land, that I could pay
ready money L600 and the rest by L150 per annum, to make up as much as
will buy L50 per annum, which I do, though I not worth above L500 ready
money, that he may think me to be a greater saver than I am.  Here I took
my leave of my father, who is going this morning to my uncle upon my
aunt's letter this week that he is not well and so needs my father's help.
At noon home, and then with my Lady Batten, Mrs. Rebecca Allen, Mrs.
Thompson, &c., two coaches of us, we went and saw "Bartholomew Fayre"
acted very well, and so home again and staid at Sir W. Batten's late, and
so home to bed.  This day Mr. Holden sent me a bever, which cost me L4 5s.

     [Whilst a hat (see January 28th, 1660-61, ante) cost only 35s.  See
     also Lord Sandwich's vexation at his beaver being stolen, and a hat
     only left in lieu of it, April 30th, 1661, ante; and April 19th and
     26th, 1662, Post.--B.]

28th.  At home all the morning practising to sing, which is now my great
trade, and at noon to my Lady and dined with her.  So back and to the
office, and there sat till 7 at night, and then Sir W. Pen and I in his
coach went to Moorefields, and there walked, and stood and saw the
wrestling, which I never saw so much of before, between the north and west
countrymen.  So home, and this night had our bed set up in our room that
we called the Nursery, where we lay, and I am very much pleased with the
room.

29th.  By a letter from the Duke complaining of the delay of the ships
that are to be got ready, Sir Williams both and I went to Deptford and
there examined into the delays, and were satisfyed.  So back again home
and staid till the afternoon, and then I walked to the Bell at the Maypole
in the Strand, and thither came to me by appointment Mr. Chetwind,
Gregory, and Hartlibb, so many of our old club, and Mr. Kipps, where we
staid and drank and talked with much pleasure till it was late, and so I
walked home and to bed.  Mr. Chetwind by chewing of tobacco is become very
fat and sallow, whereas he was consumptive, and in our discourse he fell
commending of "Hooker's Ecclesiastical Polity," as the best book, and the
only one that made him a Christian, which puts me upon the buying of it,
which I will do shortly.

30th (Lord's day).  To church, where we observe the trade of briefs is
come now up to so constant a course every Sunday, that we resolve to give
no more to them.

     [It appears, from an old MS. account-book of the collections in the
     church of St. Olave, Hart Street, beginning in 1642, still extant,
     that the money gathered on the 30th June, 1661, "for several
     inhabitants of the parish of St. Dunstan in the West towards their
     losse by fire," amounted to "xxs. viiid."  Pepys might complain of
     the trade in briefs, as similar contributions had been levied
     fourteen weeks successively, previous to the one in question at St.
     Olave's church.  Briefs were abolished in 1828.--B.]

A good sermon, and then home to dinner, my wife and I all alone.  After
dinner Sir Williams both and I by water to Whitehall, where having walked
up and down, at last we met with the Duke of York, according to an order
sent us yesterday from him, to give him an account where the fault lay in
the not sending out of the ships, which we find to be only the wind hath
been against them, and so they could not get out of the river.  Hence I to
Graye's Inn Walk, all alone, and with great pleasure seeing the fine
ladies walk there.  Myself humming to myself (which now-a-days is my
constant practice since I begun to learn to sing) the trillo, and found by
use that it do come upon me.  Home very weary and to bed, finding my wife
not sick, but yet out of order, that I fear she will come to be sick.
This day the Portuguese Embassador came to White Hall to take leave of the
King; he being now going to end all with the Queen, and to send her over.
The weather now very fair and pleasant, but very hot. My father gone to
Brampton to see my uncle Robert, not knowing whether to find him dead or
alive.  Myself lately under a great expense of money upon myself in
clothes and other things, but I hope to make it up this summer by my
having to do in getting things ready to send with the next fleet to the
Queen.

Myself in good health, but mighty apt to take cold, so that this hot
weather I am fain to wear a cloth before my belly.





                          DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS.

                                   JULY

                                   1661

July 1st.  This morning I went up and down into the city, to buy several
things, as I have lately done, for my house.  Among other things, a fair
chest of drawers for my own chamber, and an Indian gown for myself.  The
first cost me 33s., the other 34s.  Home and dined there, and Theodore
Goodgroome, my singing master, with me, and then to our singing.  After
that to the office, and then home.

2nd.  To Westminster Hall and there walked up and down, it being Term
time.  Spoke with several, among others my cozen Roger Pepys, who was
going up to the Parliament House, and inquired whether I had heard from my
father since he went to Brampton, which I had done yesterday, who writes
that my uncle is by fits stupid, and like a man that is drunk, and
sometimes speechless.  Home, and after my singing master had done, took
coach and went to Sir William Davenant's Opera; this being the fourth day
that it hath begun, and the first that I have seen it.  To-day was acted
the second part of "The Siege of Rhodes."  We staid a very great while for
the King and the Queen of Bohemia.  And by the breaking of a board over
our heads, we had a great deal of dust fell into the ladies' necks and the
men's hair, which made good sport.  The King being come, the scene opened;
which indeed is very fine and magnificent, and well acted, all but the
Eunuch, who was so much out that he was hissed off the stage. Home and
wrote letters to my Lord at sea, and so to bed.

3rd.  To Westminster to Mr. Edward Montagu about business of my Lord's,
and so to the Wardrobe, and there dined with my Lady, who is in some
mourning for her brother, Mr. Saml.  Crew, who died yesterday of the
spotted fever.  So home through Duck Lane' to inquire for some Spanish
books, but found none that pleased me.  So to the office, and that being
done to Sir W. Batten's with the Comptroller, where we sat late talking
and disputing with Mr. Mills the parson of our parish.  This day my Lady
Batten and my wife were at the burial of a daughter of Sir John Lawson's,
and had rings for themselves and their husbands.  Home and to
bed.

4th.  At home all the morning; in the afternoon I went to the Theatre, and
there I saw "Claracilla" (the first time I ever saw it), well acted. But
strange to see this house, that used to be so thronged, now empty since
the Opera begun; and so will continue for a while, I believe. Called at my
father's, and there I heard that my uncle Robert--[Robert Pepys, of
Brampton, who died on the following day.]--continues to have his fits of
stupefaction every day for 10 or 12 hours together.  From thence to the
Exchange at night, and then went with my uncle Wight to the Mitre and were
merry, but he takes it very ill that my father would go out of town to
Brampton on this occasion and would not tell him of it, which I
endeavoured to remove but could not.  Here Mr. Batersby the apothecary
was, who told me that if my uncle had the emerods--[Haemorrhoids or
piles.]--(which I think he had) and that now they are stopped, he will lay
his life that bleeding behind by leeches will cure him, but I am resolved
not to meddle in it.  Home and to bed.

5th.  At home, and in the afternoon to the office, and that being done all
went to Sir W. Batten's and there had a venison pasty, and were very
merry.  At night home and to bed.

6th.  Waked this morning with news, brought me by a messenger on purpose,
that my uncle Robert is dead, and died yesterday; so I rose sorry in some
respect, glad in my expectations in another respect.  So I made myself
ready, went and told my uncle Wight, my Lady, and some others thereof, and
bought me a pair of boots in St. Martin's, and got myself ready, and then
to the Post House and set out about eleven and twelve o'clock, taking the
messenger with me that came to me, and so we rode and got well by nine
o'clock to Brampton, where I found my father well.  My uncle's corps in a
coffin standing upon joynt-stools in the chimney in the hall; but it begun
to smell, and so I caused it to be set forth in the yard all night, and
watched by two men.  My aunt I found in bed in a most nasty ugly pickle,
made me sick to see it.  My father and I lay together tonight, I greedy to
see the will, but did not ask to see it till to-morrow.

7th (Lord's day).  In the morning my father and I walked in the garden and
read the will; where, though he gives me nothing at present till my
father's death, or at least very little, yet I am glad to see that he hath
done so well for us, all, and well to the rest of his kindred. After that
done, we went about getting things, as ribbands and gloves, ready for the
burial.  Which in the afternoon was done; where, it being Sunday, all
people far and near come in; and in the greatest disorder that ever I saw,
we made shift to serve them what we had of wine and other things; and then
to carry him to the church, where Mr. Taylor buried him, and Mr. Turners
preached a funerall sermon, where he spoke not particularly of him
anything, but that he was one so well known for his honesty, that it spoke
for itself above all that he could say for it. And so made a very good
sermon.  Home with some of the company who supped there, and things being
quiet, at night to bed.

8th, 9th, Loth, 11th, 12th, 13th.  I fell to work, and my father to look
over my uncle's papers and clothes, and continued all this week upon that
business, much troubled with my aunt's base, ugly humours.  We had news of
Tom Trice's putting in a caveat against us, in behalf of his mother, to
whom my uncle hath not given anything, and for good reason therein
expressed, which troubled us also.  But above all, our trouble is to find
that his estate appears nothing as we expected, and all the world
believes; nor his papers so well sorted as I would have had them, but all
in confusion, that break my brains to understand them.  We missed also the
surrenders of his copyhold land, without which the land would not come to
us, but to the heir at law, so that what with this, and the badness of the
drink and the ill opinion I have of the meat, and the biting of the gnats
by night and my disappointment in getting home this week, and the trouble
of sorting all the papers, I am almost out of my wits with trouble, only I
appear the more contented, because I would not have my father troubled.
The latter end of the week Mr. Philips comes home from London, and so we
advised with him and have the best counsel he could give us, but for all
that we were not quiet in our minds.

14th (Lord's day).  At home, and Robert Barnwell with us, and dined, and
in the evening my father and I walked round Portholme and viewed all the
fields, which was very pleasant.  Thence to Hinchingbroke, which is now
all in dirt, because of my Lord's building, which will make it very
magnificent.  Back to Brampton, and to supper and to bed.

15th.  Up by three o'clock this morning, and rode to Cambridge, and was
there by seven o'clock, where, after I was trimmed, I went to Christ
College, and found my brother John at eight o'clock in bed, which vexed
me.  Then to King's College chappell, where I found the scholars in their
surplices at the service with the organs, which is a strange sight to what
it used in my time to be here.  Then with Dr. Fairbrother (whom I met
there) to the Rose tavern, and called for some wine, and there met
fortunately with Mr. Turner of our office, and sent for his wife, and were
very merry (they being come to settle their son here), and sent also for
Mr. Sanchy, of Magdalen, with whom and other gentlemen, friends of his, we
were very merry, and I treated them as well as I could, and so at noon
took horse again, having taken leave of my cozen Angier, and rode to
Impington, where I found my old uncle

     [Talbot Pepys, sixth son of John Pepys of Impington, was born 1583,
     and therefore at this time he was seventy-eight years of age.  He
     was educated at Trinity Hall, Cambridge, and called to the bar at
     the Middle Temple in 1605.  He was M.P. for Cambridge in 1625, and
     Recorder of Cambridge from 1624 to 1660, in which year he was
     succeeded by his son Roger.  He died of the plague, March, 1666,
     aged eighty-three.]

sitting all alone, like a man out of the world: he can hardly see; but all
things else he do pretty livelyly.  Then with Dr. John Pepys and him, I
read over the will, and had their advice therein, who, as to the
sufficiency thereof confirmed me, and advised me as to the other parts
thereof.  Having done there, I rode to Gravely with much ado to inquire
for a surrender of my uncle's in some of the copyholders' hands there, but
I can hear of none, which puts me into very great trouble of mind, and so
with a sad heart rode home to Brampton, but made myself as cheerful as I
could to my father, and so to bed.

16th, 17th, 18th, 19th.  These four days we spent in putting things in
order, letting of the crop upon the ground, agreeing with Stankes to have
a care of our business in our absence, and we think ourselves in nothing
happy but in lighting upon him to be our bayly; in riding to Offord and
Sturtlow, and up and down all our lands, and in the evening walking, my
father and I about the fields talking, and had advice from Mr. Moore from
London, by my desire, that the three witnesses of the will being all
legatees, will not do the will any wrong.  To-night Serjeant Bernard, I
hear, is come home into the country.  To supper and to bed.  My aunt
continuing in her base, hypocritical tricks, which both Jane Perkin (of
whom we make great use), and the maid do tell us every day of.

20th.  Up to Huntingdon this morning to Sir Robert Bernard, with whom I
met Jaspar Trice.  So Sir Robert caused us to sit down together and began
discourse very fairly between us, so I drew out the Will and show it him,
and [he] spoke between us as well as I could desire, but could come to no
issue till Tom Trice comes.  Then Sir Robert and I fell to talk about the
money due to us upon surrender from Piggott, L164., which he tells me will
go with debts to the heir at law, which breaks my heart on the other side.
Here I staid and dined with Sir Robert Bernard and his lady, my Lady
Digby, a very good woman.  After dinner I went into the town and spent the
afternoon, sometimes with Mr. Phillips, sometimes with Dr. Symcottes, Mr.
Vinter, Robert Ethell, and many more friends, and at last Mr. Davenport,
Phillips, Jaspar Trice, myself and others at Mother-----over against the
Crown we sat and drank ale and were very merry till 9 at night, and so
broke up.  I walked home, and there found Tom Trice come, and he and my
father gone to Goody Gorum's, where I found them and Jaspar Trice got
before me, and Mr. Greene, and there had some calm discourse, but came to
no issue, and so parted.  So home and to bed, being now pretty well again
of my left hand, which lately was stung and very much swelled.

21st (Lord's day).  At home all the morning, putting my papers in order
against my going to-morrow and doing many things else to that end. Had a
good dinner, and Stankes and his wife with us.  To my business again in
the afternoon, and in the evening came the two Trices, Mr. Greene, and Mr.
Philips, and so we began to argue.  At last it came to some agreement that
for our giving of my aunt L10 she is to quit the house, and for other
matters they are to be left to the law, which do please us all, and so we
broke up, pretty well satisfyed.  Then came Mr. Barnwell and J. Bowles and
supped with us, and after supper away, and so I having taken leave of them
and put things in the best order I could against to-morrow I went to bed.
Old William Luffe having been here this afternoon and paid up his bond of
L20, and I did give him into his hand my uncle's surrender of Sturtlow to
me before Mr. Philips, R. Barnwell, and Mr. Pigott, which he did
acknowledge to them my uncle did in his lifetime deliver to him.

22nd.  Up by three, and going by four on my way to London; but the day
proves very cold, so that having put on no stockings but thread ones under
my boots, I was fain at Bigglesworth to buy a pair of coarse woollen ones,
and put them on.  So by degrees till I come to Hatfield before twelve
o'clock, where I had a very good dinner with my hostess, at my Lord of
Salisbury's Inn, and after dinner though weary I walked all alone to the
Vineyard, which is now a very beautiful place again; and coming back I met
with Mr. Looker, my Lord's gardener (a friend of Mr. Eglin's), who showed
me the house, the chappell with brave pictures, and, above all, the
gardens, such as I never saw in all my life; nor so good flowers, nor so
great gooseberrys, as big as nutmegs.  Back to the inn, and drank with
him, and so to horse again, and with much ado got to London, and set him
up at Smithfield; so called at my uncle Fenner's, my mother's, my Lady's,
and so home, in all which I found all things as well as I could expect.
So weary and to bed.

23rd.  Put on my mourning.  Made visits to Sir W. Pen and Batten.  Then to
Westminster, and at the Hall staid talking with Mrs. Michell a good while,
and in the afternoon, finding myself unfit for business, I went to the
Theatre, and saw "Brenoralt," I never saw before.  It seemed a good play,
but ill acted; only I sat before Mrs. Palmer, the King's mistress, and
filled my eyes with her, which much pleased me.  Then to my father's,
where by my desire I met my uncle Thomas, and discoursed of my uncle's
will to him, and did satisfy [him] as well as I could.  So to my uncle
Wight's, but found him out of doors, but my aunt I saw and staid a while,
and so home and to bed.  Troubled to hear how proud and idle Pall is
grown, that I am resolved not to keep her.

24th.  This morning my wife in bed tells me of our being robbed of our
silver tankard, which vexed me all day for the negligence of my people to
leave the door open.  My wife and I by water to Whitehall, where I left
her to her business and I to my cozen Thomas Pepys, and discoursed with
him at large about our business of my uncle's will.  He can give us no
light at all into his estate, but upon the whole tells me that he do
believe that he has left but little money, though something more than we
have found, which is about L500.  Here came Sir G. Lane by chance, seeing
a bill upon the door to hire the house, with whom my coz and I walked all
up and down, and indeed it is a very pretty place, and he do intend to
leave the agreement for the House, which is L400 fine, and L46 rent a year
to me between them.  Then to the Wardrobe, but come too late, and so dined
with the servants.  And then to my Lady, who do shew my wife and me the
greatest favour in the world, in which I take great content.  Home by
water and to the office all the afternoon, which is a great pleasure to me
again, to talk with persons of quality and to be in command, and I give it
out among them that the estate left me is L200 a year in land, besides
moneys, because I would put an esteem upon myself.  At night home and to
bed after I had set down my journals ever since my going from London this
journey to this house.  This afternoon I hear that my man Will hath lost
his clock with my tankard, at which I am very glad.

25th.  This morning came my box of papers from Brampton of all my uncle's
papers, which will now set me at work enough.  At noon I went to the
Exchange, where I met my uncle Wight, and found him so discontented about
my father (whether that he takes it ill that he has not been acquainted
with things, or whether he takes it ill that he has nothing left him, I
cannot tell), for which I am much troubled, and so staid not long to talk
with him.  Thence to my mother's, where I found my wife and my aunt Bell
and Mrs. Ramsey, and great store of tattle there was between the old women
and my mother, who thinks that there is, God knows what fallen to her,
which makes me mad, but it was not a proper time to speak to her of it,
and so I went away with Mr. Moore, and he and I to the Theatre, and saw
"The Jovial Crew," the first time I saw it, and indeed it is as merry and
the most innocent play that ever I saw, and well performed.  From thence
home, and wrote to my father and so to bed.  Full of thoughts to think of
the trouble that we shall go through before we come to see what will
remain to us of all our expectations.

26th.  At home all the morning, and walking met with Mr. Hill of Cambridge
at Pope's Head Alley with some women with him whom he took and me into the
tavern there, and did give us wine, and would fain seem to be very knowing
in the affairs of state, and tells me that yesterday put a change to the
whole state of England as to the Church; for the King now would be forced
to favour Presbytery, or the City would leave him: but I heed not what he
says, though upon enquiry I do find that things in the Parliament are in a
great disorder.  Home at noon and there found Mr. Moore, and with him to
an ordinary alone and dined, and there he and I read my uncle's will, and
I had his opinion on it, and still find more and more trouble like to
attend it.  Back to the office all the afternoon, and that done home for
all night.  Having the beginning of this week made a vow to myself to
drink no wine this week (finding it to unfit me to look after business),
and this day breaking of it against my will, I am much troubled for it,
but I hope God will forgive me.

27th.  To Westminster, where at Mr. Montagu's chamber I heard a Frenchman
play, a friend of Monsieur Eschar's, upon the guitar, most extreme well,
though at the best methinks it is but a bawble.  From thence to
Westminster Hall, where it was expected that the Parliament was to have
been adjourned for two or three months, but something hinders it for a day
or two.  In the lobby I spoke with Mr. George Montagu, and advised about a
ship to carry my Lord Hinchingbroke and the rest of the young gentlemen to
France, and they have resolved of going in a hired vessell from Rye, and
not in a man of war.  He told me in discourse that my Lord Chancellor is
much envied, and that many great men, such as the Duke of Buckingham and
my Lord of Bristoll, do endeavour to undermine him, and that he believes
it will not be done; for that the King (though he loves him not in the way
of a companion, as he do these young gallants that can answer him in his
pleasures), yet cannot be without him, for his policy and service.  From
thence to the Wardrobe, where my wife met me, it being my Lord of
Sandwich's birthday, and so we had many friends here, Mr. Townsend and his
wife, and Captain Ferrers lady and Captain Isham, and were very merry, and
had a good venison pasty.  Mr. Pargiter, the merchant, was with us also.
After dinner Mr. Townsend was called upon by Captain Cooke: so we three
went to a tavern hard by, and there he did give us a song or two; and
without doubt he hath the best manner of singing in the world.  Back to my
wife, and with my Lady Jem. and Pall by water through bridge, and showed
them the ships with great pleasure, and then took them to my house to show
it them (my Lady their mother having been lately all alone to see it and
my wife, in my absence in the country), and we treated them well, and were
very merry.  Then back again through bridge, and set them safe at home,
and so my wife and I by coach home again, and after writing a letter to my
father at Brampton, who, poor man, is there all alone, and I have not
heard from him since my coming from him, which troubles me.  To bed.

28th (Lord's day).  This morning as my wife and I were going to church,
comes Mrs. Ramsay to see us, so we sent her to church, and we went too,
and came back to dinner, and she dined with us and was wellcome.  To
church again in the afternoon, and then come home with us Sir W. Pen, and
drank with us, and then went away, and my wife after him to see his
daughter that is lately come out of Ireland.  I staid at home at my book;
she came back again and tells me that whereas I expected she should have
been a great beauty, she is a very plain girl.  This evening my wife gives
me all my linen, which I have put up, and intend to keep it now in my own
custody.  To supper and to bed.

29th.  This morning we began again to sit in the mornings at the office,
but before we sat down.  Sir R. Slingsby and I went to Sir R. Ford's to
see his house, and we find it will be very convenient for us to have it
added to the office if he can be got to part with it.  Then we sat down
and did business in the office.  So home to dinner, and my brother Tom
dined with me, and after dinner he and I alone in my chamber had a great
deal of talk, and I find that unless my father can forbear to make profit
of his house in London and leave it to Tom, he has no mind to set up the
trade any where else, and so I know not what to do with him.  After this I
went with him to my mother, and there told her how things do fall out
short of our expectations, which I did (though it be true) to make her
leave off her spending, which I find she is nowadays very free in,
building upon what is left to us by my uncle to bear her out in it, which
troubles me much.  While I was here word is brought that my aunt Fenner is
exceeding ill, and that my mother is sent for presently to come to her:
also that my cozen Charles Glassecocke, though very ill himself, is this
day gone to the country to his brother, John Glassecocke, who is a-dying
there.  Home.

30th.  After my singing-master had done with me this morning, I went to
White Hall and Westminster Hall, where I found the King expected to come
and adjourn the Parliament.  I found the two Houses at a great difference,
about the Lords challenging their privileges not to have their houses
searched, which makes them deny to pass the House of Commons' Bill for
searching for pamphlets and seditious books.  Thence by water to the
Wardrobe (meeting the King upon the water going in his barge to adjourn
the House) where I dined with my Lady, and there met Dr. Thomas Pepys, who
I found to be a silly talking fellow, but very good-natured.  So home to
the office, where we met about the business of Tangier this afternoon.
That done, at home I found Mr. Moore, and he and I walked into the City
and there parted.  To Fleet Street to find when the Assizes begin at
Cambridge and Huntingdon, in order to my going to meet with Roger Pepys
for counsel.  So in Fleet Street I met with Mr. Salisbury, who is now
grown in less than two years' time so great a limner--that he is become
excellent, and gets a great deal of money at it.  I took him to Hercules
Pillars to drink, and there came Mr. Whore (whom I formerly have known), a
friend of his to him, who is a very ingenious fellow, and there I sat with
them a good while, and so home and wrote letters late to my Lord and to my
father, and then to bed.

31st.  Singing-master came to me this morning; then to the office all the
morning.  In the afternoon I went to the Theatre, and there I saw "The
Tamer Tamed"  well done.  And then home, and prepared to go to Walthamstow
to-morrow.  This night I was forced to borrow L40 of Sir W. Batten.

                          DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS.
                                  AUGUST
                                   1661

August 1st.  This morning Sir Williams both, and my wife and I and Mrs.
Margarett Pen (this first time that I have seen her since she came from
Ireland) went by coach to Walthamstow, a-gossiping to Mrs. Browne, where I
did give her six silver spoons--[But not the porringer of silver.  See May
29th, 1661.--M. B]--for her boy.  Here we had a venison pasty, brought hot
from London, and were very merry.  Only I hear how nurse's husband has
spoken strangely of my Lady Batten how she was such a man's whore, who
indeed is known to leave her her estate, which we would fain have
reconciled to-day, but could not and indeed I do believe that the story is
true.  Back again at night home.

2d.  At the office all the morning.  At noon Dr. Thos. Pepys dined with
me, and after dinner my brother Tom came to me and then I made myself
ready to get a-horseback for Cambridge.  So I set out and rode to Ware,
this night, in the way having much discourse with a fellmonger,--[A dealer
in hides.]--a Quaker, who told me what a wicked man he had been all his
life-time till within this two years.  Here I lay, and

3rd.  Got up early the next morning and got to Barkway, where I staid and
drank, and there met with a letter-carrier of Cambridge, with whom I rode
all the way to Cambridge, my horse being tired, and myself very wet with
rain.  I went to the Castle Hill, where the judges were at the Assizes;
and I staid till Roger Pepys rose and went with him, and dined with his
brother, the Doctor, and Claxton at Trinity Hall.  Then parted, and I went
to the Rose, and there with Mr. Pechell, Sanchy, and others, sat and drank
till night and were very merry, only they tell me how high the old doctors
are in the University over those they found there, though a great deal
better scholars than themselves; for which I am very sorry, and, above
all, Dr. Gunning.  At night I took horse, and rode with Roger Pepys and
his two brothers to Impington, and there with great respect was led up by
them to the best chamber in the house, and there slept.

4th (Lord's day).  Got up, and by and by walked into the orchard with my
cozen Roger, and there plucked some fruit, and then discoursed at large
about the business I came for, that is, about my uncle's will, in which he
did give me good satisfaction, but tells me I shall meet with a great deal
of trouble in it.  However, in all things he told me what I am to expect
and what to do.  To church, and had a good plain sermon, and my uncle
Talbot went with us and at our coming in the country-people all rose with
so much reverence; and when the parson begins, he begins "Right
worshipfull and dearly beloved" to us.  Home to dinner, which was very
good, and then to church again, and so home and to walk up and down and so
to supper, and after supper to talk about publique matters, wherein Roger
Pepys--(who I find a very sober man, and one whom I do now honour more
than ever before for this discourse sake only) told me how basely things
have been carried in Parliament by the young men, that did labour to
oppose all things that were moved by serious men.  That they are the most
prophane swearing fellows that ever he heard in his life, which makes him
think that they will spoil all, and bring things into a warr again if they
can.  So to bed.

5th.  Early to Huntingdon, but was fain to stay a great while at Stanton
because of the rain, and there borrowed a coat of a man for 6d., and so he
rode all the way, poor man, without any.  Staid at Huntingdon for a
little, but the judges are not come hither: so I went to Brampton, and
there found my father very well, and my aunt gone from the house, which I
am glad of, though it costs us a great deal of money, viz. L10.  Here I
dined, and after dinner took horse and rode to Yelling, to my cozen
Nightingale's, who hath a pretty house here, and did learn of her all she
could tell me concerning my business, and has given me some light by her
discourse how I may get a surrender made for Graveley lands.  Hence to
Graveley, and there at an alehouse met with Chancler and Jackson (one of
my tenants for Cotton closes) and another with whom I had a great deal of
discourse, much to my satisfaction.  Hence back again to Brampton and
after supper to bed, being now very quiet in the house, which is a content
to us.

6th.  Up early and went to Mr. Phillips, but lost my labour, he lying at
Huntingdon last night, so I went back again and took horse and rode
thither, where I staid with Thos. Trice and Mr. Philips drinking till
noon, and then Tom Trice and I to Brampton, where he to Goody Gorum's and
I home to my father, who could discern that I had been drinking, which he
did never see or hear of before, so I eat a bit of dinner and went with
him to Gorum's, and there talked with Tom Trice, and then went and took
horse for London, and with much ado, the ways being very bad, got to
Baldwick, and there lay and had a good supper by myself.  The landlady
being a pretty woman, but I durst not take notice of her, her husband
being there.  Before supper I went to see the church, which is a very
handsome church, but I find that both here, and every where else that I
come, the Quakers do still continue, and rather grow than lessen.  To bed.

7th.  Called up at three o'clock, and was a-horseback by four; and as I
was eating my breakfast I saw a man riding by that rode a little way upon
the road with me last night; and he being going with venison in his
pan-yards to London, I called him in and did give him his breakfast with
me, and so we went together all the way.  At Hatfield we bayted and walked
into the great house through all the courts; and I would fain have stolen
a pretty dog that followed me, but I could not, which troubled me.  To
horse again, and by degrees with much ado got to London, where I found all
well at home and at my father's and my Lady's, but no news yet from my
Lord where he is.  At my Lady's (whither I went with Dean Fuller, who came
to my house to see me just as I was come home) I met with Mr. Moore, who
told me at what a loss he was for me, for to-morrow is a Seal day at the
Privy Seal, and it being my month, I am to wait upon my Lord Roberts, Lord
Privy Seal, at the Seal.  Home and to bed.

8th.  Early in the mornink to Whitehall, but my Lord Privy Seal came not
all the morning.  At noon Mr. Moore and I to the Wardrobe to dinner, where
my Lady and all merry and well.  Back again to the Privy Seal; but my Lord
comes not all the afternoon, which made me mad and gives all the world
reason to talk of his delaying of business, as well as of his severity and
ill using of the Clerks of the Privy Seal.  In the evening I took Mons.
Eschar and Mr. Moore and Dr. Pierce's brother (the souldier) to the tavern
next the Savoy, and there staid and drank with them.  Here I met with Mr.
Mage, and discoursing of musique Mons.  Eschar spoke so much against the
English and in praise of the French that made him mad, and so he went
away.  After a stay with them a little longer we parted and I home.

9th.  To the office, where word is brought me by a son-in-law of Mr.
Pierces; the purser, that his father is a dying and that he desires that I
would come to him before he dies.  So I rose from the table and went,
where I found him not so ill as I thought that he had been ill.  So I did
promise to be a friend to his wife and family if he should die, which was
all he desired of me, but I do believe he will recover.  Back again to the
office, where I found Sir G. Carteret had a day or two ago invited some of
the officers to dinner to-day at Deptford.  So at noon, when I heard that
he was a-coming, I went out, because I would see whether he would send to
me or no to go with them; but he did not, which do a little trouble me
till I see how it comes to pass.  Although in other things I am glad of it
because of my going again to-day to the Privy Seal.  I dined at home, and
having dined news is brought by Mr. Hater that his wife is now falling
into labour, so he is come for my wife, who presently went with him.  I to
White Hall, where, after four o'clock, comes my Lord Privy Seal, and so we
went up to his chamber over the gate at White Hall, where he asked me what
deputacon I had from My Lord.  I told him none; but that I am sworn my
Lord's deputy by both of the Secretarys, which did satisfy him.  So he
caused Mr. Moore to read over all the bills as is the manner, and all
ended very well.  So that I see the Lyon is not so fierce as he is
painted.  That being done Mons. Eschar (who all this afternoon had been
waiting at the Privy Seal for the Warrant for L5,000 for my Lord of
Sandwich's preparation for Portugal) and I took some wine with us and went
to visit la belle Pierce, who we find very big with child, and a pretty
lady, one Mrs. Clifford, with her, where we staid and were extraordinary
merry.  From thence I took coach to my father's, where I found him come
home this day from Brampton (as I expected) very well, and after some
discourse about business and it being very late I took coach again home,
where I hear by my wife that Mrs. Hater is not yet delivered, but
continues in her pains.  So to bed.

10th.  This morning came the maid that my wife hath lately hired for a
chamber maid.  She is very ugly, so that I cannot care for her, but
otherwise she seems very good.  But however she do come about three weeks
hence, when my wife comes back from Brampton, if she go with my father. By
and by came my father to my house, and so he and I went and found out my
uncle Wight at the Coffee House, and there did agree with him to meet the
next week with my uncle Thomas and read over the Captain's will before
them both for their satisfaction.  Having done with him I went to my
Lady's and dined with her, and after dinner took the two young gentlemen
and the two ladies and carried them and Captain Ferrers to the Theatre,
and shewed them "The merry Devill of Edmunton," which is a very merry
play, the first time I ever saw it, which pleased me well.  And that being
done I took them all home by coach to my house and there gave them fruit
to eat and wine.  So by water home with them, and so home myself.

11th (Lord's day).  To our own church in the forenoon, and in the
afternoon to Clerkenwell Church, only to see the two

     [A comedy acted at the Globe, and first printed in 1608.  In the
     original entry in the Stationers' books it is said to be by T. B.,
     which may stand for Tony or Anthony Brewer.  The play has been
     attributed without authority both to Shakespeare and to Drayton.]

fayre Botelers;--[Mrs. Frances Butler and her sister.]--and I happened to
be placed in the pew where they afterwards came to sit, but the pew by
their coming being too full, I went out into the next, and there sat, and
had my full view of them both, but I am out of conceit now with them,
Colonel Dillon being come back from Ireland again, and do still court
them, and comes to church with them, which makes me think they are not
honest.  Hence to Graye's-Inn walks, and there staid a good while; where I
met with Ned Pickering, who told me what a great match of hunting of a
stagg the King had yesterday; and how the King tired all their horses, and
come home with not above two or three able to keep pace with him.  So to
my father's, and there supped, and so home.

12th.  At the office this morning.  At home in the afternoon, and had
notice that my Lord Hinchingbroke is fallen ill, which I fear is with the
fruit that I did give them on Saturday last at my house: so in the evening
I went thither and there found him very ill, and in great fear of the
smallpox.  I supped with my Lady, and did consult about him, but we find
it best to let him lie where he do; and so I went home with my heart full
of trouble for my Lord Hinchinabroke's sickness, and more for my Lord
Sandwich's himself, whom we are now confirmed is sick ashore at Alicante,
who, if he should miscarry, God knows in what condition would his family
be.  I dined to-day with my Lord Crew, who is now at Sir H. Wright's,
while his new house is making fit for him, and he is much troubled also at
these things.

13th.  To the Privy Seal in the morning, then to the Wardrobe to dinner,
where I met my wife, and found my young Lord very ill.  So my Lady intends
to send her other three sons, Sidney, Oliver, and John, to my house, for
fear of the small-pox.  After dinner I went to my father's, where I found
him within, and went up to him, and there found him settling his papers
against his removal, and I took some old papers of difference between me
and my wife and took them away.  After that Pall being there I spoke to my
father about my intention not to keep her longer for such and such
reasons, which troubled him and me also, and had like to have come to some
high words between my mother and me, who is become a very simple woman.
By and by comes in Mrs. Cordery to take her leave of my father, thinking
he was to go presently into the country, and will have us to come and see
her before he do go.  Then my father and I went forth to Mr. Rawlinson's,
where afterwards comes my uncle Thomas and his two sons, and then my uncle
Wight by appointment of us all, and there we read the will and told them
how things are, and what our thoughts are of kindness to my uncle Thomas
if he do carry himself peaceable, but otherwise if he persist to keep his
caveat up against us.  So he promised to withdraw it, and seemed to be
very well contented with things as they are.  After a while drinking, we
paid all and parted, and so I home, and there found my Lady's three sons
come, of which I am glad that I am in condition to do her and my Lord any
service in this kind, but my mind is yet very much troubled about my Lord
of Sandwich's health, which I am afeard of.

14th.  This morning Sir W. Batten and Sir W. Pen and I, waited upon the
Duke of York in his chamber, to give him an account of the condition of
the Navy for lack of money, and how our own very bills are offered upon
the Exchange, to be sold at 20 in the 100 loss.  He is much troubled at
it, and will speak to the King and Council of it this morning.  So I went
to my Lady's and dined with her, and found my Lord Hinchingbroke somewhat
better.  After dinner Captain Ferrers and I to the Theatre, and there saw
"The Alchymist;" and there I saw Sir W. Pen, who took us when the play was
done and carried the Captain to Paul's and set him down, and me home with
him, and he and I to the Dolphin, but not finding Sir W. Batten there, we
went and carried a bottle of wine to his house, and there sat a while and
talked, and so home to bed.  At home I found a letter from Mr. Creed of
the 15th of July last, that tells me that my Lord is rid of his pain
(which was wind got into the muscles of his right side) and his feaver,
and is now in hopes to go aboard in a day or two, which do give me mighty
great comfort.

15th.  To the Privy Seal and Whitehall, up and down, and at noon Sir W.
Pen carried me to Paul's, and so I walked to the Wardrobe and dined with
my Lady, and there told her, of my Lord's sickness (of which though it
hath been the town-talk this fortnight, she had heard nothing) and
recovery, of which she was glad, though hardly persuaded of the latter. I
found my Lord Hinchingbroke better and better, and the worst past. Thence
to the Opera, which begins again to-day with "The Witts," never acted yet
with scenes; and the King and Duke and Duchess were there (who dined
to-day with Sir H. Finch, reader at the Temple, in great state); and
indeed it is a most excellent play, and admirable scenes.  So home and was
overtaken by Sir W. Pen in his coach, who has been this afternoon with my
Lady Batten, &c., at the Theatre.  So I followed him to the Dolphin, where
Sir W. Batten was, and there we sat awhile, and so home after we had made
shift to fuddle Mr. Falconer of Woolwich.  So home.

16th.  At the office all the morning, though little to be done; because
all our clerks are gone to the buriall of Tom Whitton, one of the
Controller's clerks, a very ingenious, and a likely young man to live, as
any in the Office.  But it is such a sickly time both in City and country
every where (of a sort of fever), that never was heard of almost, unless
it was in a plague-time.

Among others, the famous Tom Fuller is dead of it; and Dr. Nichols, Dean
of Paul's; and my Lord General Monk is very dangerously ill.  Dined at
home with the children and were merry, and my father with me; who after
dinner he and I went forth about business.  Among other things we found
one Dr. John Williams at an alehouse, where we staid till past nine at
night, in Shoe Lane, talking about our country business, and I found him
so well acquainted with the matters of Gravely that I expect he will be of
great use to me.  So by link home.  I understand my Aunt Fenner is upon
the point of death.

17th.  At the Privy Seal, where we had a seal this morning.  Then met with
Ned Pickering, and walked with him into St. James's Park (where I had not
been a great while), and there found great and very noble alterations.
And, in our discourse, he was very forward to complain and to speak loud
of the lewdness and beggary of the Court, which I am sorry to hear, and
which I am afeard will bring all to ruin again.  So he and I to the
Wardrobe to dinner, and after dinner Captain Ferrers and I to the Opera,
and saw "The Witts" again, which I like exceedingly.  The Queen of Bohemia
was here, brought by my Lord Craven.  So the Captain and I and another to
the Devil tavern and drank, and so by coach home.  Troubled in mind that I
cannot bring myself to mind my business, but to be so much in love of
plays.  We have been at a great loss a great while for a vessel that I
sent about a month ago with, things of my Lord's to Lynn, and cannot till
now hear of them, but now we are told that they are put into Soale Bay,
but to what purpose I know not.

18th (Lord's day).  To our own church in the morning and so home to
dinner, where my father and Dr. Tom Pepys came to me to dine, and were
very merry.  After dinner I took my wife and Mr. Sidney to my Lady to see
my Lord Hinchingbroke, who is now pretty well again, and sits up and walks
about his chamber.  So I went to White Hall, and there hear that my Lord
General Monk continues very ill: so I went to la belle Pierce and sat with
her; and then to walk in St. James's Park, and saw great variety of fowl
which I never saw before and so home.  At night fell to read in "Hooker's
Ecclesiastical Polity," which Mr. Moore did give me last Wednesday very
handsomely bound; and which I shall read with great pains and love for his
sake.  So to supper and to bed.

19th.  At the office all the morning; at noon the children are sent for by
their mother my Lady Sandwich to dinner, and my wife goes along with them
by coach, and she to my father's and dines there, and from thence with
them to see Mrs. Cordery, who do invite them before my father goes into
the country, and thither I should have gone too but that I am sent for to
the Privy Seal, and there I found a thing of my Lord Chancellor's

     [This "thing" was probably one of those large grants which Clarendon
     quietly, or, as he himself says, "without noise or scandal,"
     procured from the king.  Besides lands and manors, Clarendon states
     at one time that the king gave him a "little billet into his hand,
     that contained a warrant of his own hand-writing to Sir Stephen Fox
     to pay to the Chancellor the sum of L20,000,--[approximately 10
     million dollars in the year 2000]--of which nobody could have
     notice."  In 1662 he received L5,000 out of the money voted to the
     king by the Parliament of Ireland, as he mentions in his vindication
     of himself against the impeachment of the Commons; and we shall see
     that Pepys, in February, 1664, names another sum of L20,000 given to
     the Chancellor to clear the mortgage upon Clarendon Park; and this
     last sum, it was believed, was paid from the money received from
     France by the sale of Dunkirk.--B.]

to be sealed this afternoon, and so I am forced to go to Worcester House,
where severall Lords are met in Council this afternoon.  And while I am
waiting there, in comes the King in a plain common riding-suit and velvet
cap, in which he seemed a very ordinary man to one that had not known him.
Here I staid till at last, hearing that my Lord Privy Seal had not the
seal here, Mr. Moore and I hired a coach and went to Chelsy, and there at
an alehouse sat and drank and past the time till my Lord Privy Seal came
to his house, and so we to him and examined and sealed the thing, and so
homewards, but when we came to look for our coach we found it gone, so we
were fain to walk home afoot and saved our money.  We met with a companion
that walked with us, and coming among some trees near the Neate houses, he
began to whistle, which did give us some suspicion, but it proved that he
that answered him was Mr. Marsh (the Lutenist) and his wife, and so we all
walked to Westminster together, in our way drinking a while at my cost,
and had a song of him, but his voice is quite lost.  So walked home, and
there I found that my Lady do keep the children at home, and lets them not
come any more hither at present, which a little troubles me to lose their
company.  This day my aunt Fenner dyed.

20th.  At the office in the morning and all the afternoon at home to put
my papers in order.  This day we come to some agreement with Sir R. Ford
for his house to be added to the office to enlarge our quarters.

21st.  This morning by appointment I went to my father, and after a
morning draft he and I went to Dr. Williams, but he not within we went to
Mrs. Terry, a daughter of Mr. Whately's, who lately offered a proposal of
her sister for a wife for my brother Tom, and with her we discoursed about
and agreed to go to her mother this afternoon to speak with her, and in
the meantime went to Will. Joyce's and to an alehouse, and drank a good
while together, he being very angry that his father Fenner will give him
and his brother no more for mourning than their father did give him and my
aunt at their mother's death, and a very troublesome fellow I still find
him to be, that his company ever wearys me.  From thence about two o'clock
to Mrs. Whately's, but she being going to dinner we went to Whitehall and
there staid till past three, and here I understand by Mr. Moore that my
Lady Sandwich is brought to bed yesterday of a young Lady, and is very
well.  So to Mrs. Whately's again, and there were well received, and she
desirous to have the thing go forward, only is afeard that her daughter is
too young and portion not big enough, but offers L200 down with her.  The
girl is very well favoured,, and a very child, but modest, and one I think
will do very well for my brother: so parted till she hears from Hatfield
from her husband, who is there; but I find them very desirous of it, and
so am I. Hence home to my father's, and I to the Wardrobe, where I supped
with the ladies, and hear their mother is well and the young child, and so
home.

22nd.  To the Privy Seal, and sealed; so home at noon, and there took my
wife by coach to my uncle Fenner's, where there was both at his house and
the Sessions, great deal of company, but poor entertainment, which I
wonder at; and the house so hot, that my uncle Wight, my father and I were
fain to go out, and stay at an alehouse awhile to cool ourselves. Then
back again and to church, my father's family being all in mourning, doing
him the greatest honour, the world believing that he did give us it: so to
church, and staid out the sermon, and then with my aunt Wight, my wife,
and Pall and I to her house by coach, and there staid and supped upon a
Westphalia ham, and so home and to bed.

23rd.  This morning I went to my father's, and there found him and my
mother in a discontent, which troubles me much, and indeed she is become
very simple and unquiet.  Hence he and I to Dr. Williams, and found him
within, and there we sat and talked a good while, and from him to Tom
Trice's to an alehouse near, and there sat and talked, and finding him
fair we examined my uncle's will before him and Dr. Williams, and had them
sign the copy and so did give T. Trice the original to prove, so he took
my father and me to one of the judges of the Court, and there we were
sworn, and so back again to the alehouse and drank and parted.  Dr.
Williams and I to a cook's where we eat a bit of mutton, and away, I to W.
Joyce's, where by appointment my wife was, and I took her to the Opera,
and shewed her "The Witts," which I had seen already twice, and was most
highly pleased with it.  So with my wife to the Wardrobe to see my Lady,
and then home.

24th.  At the office all the morning and did business; by and by we are
called to Sir W. Batten's to see the strange creature that Captain Holmes
hath brought with him from Guiny; it is a great baboon, but so much like a
man in most things, that though they say there is a species of them, yet I
cannot believe but that it is a monster got of a man and she-baboon.  I do
believe that it already understands much English, and I am of the mind it
might be taught to speak or make signs.  Hence the Comptroller and I to
Sir Rd. Ford's and viewed the house again, and are come to a complete end
with him to give him L200 per an. for it.  Home and there met Capt. Isham
inquiring for me to take his leave of me, he being upon his voyage to
Portugal, and for my letters to my Lord which are not ready.  But I took
him to the Mitre and gave him a glass of sack, and so adieu, and then
straight to the Opera, and there saw "Hamlet, Prince of Denmark," done
with scenes very well, but above all, Betterton

     [Sir William Davenant introduced the use of scenery.  The character
     of Hamlet was one of Betterton's masterpieces.  Downes tells us that
     he was taught by Davenant how the part was acted by Taylor of the
     Blackfriars, who was instructed by Shakespeare himself.]

did the prince's part beyond imagination.  Hence homeward, and met with
Mr. Spong and took him to the Sampson in Paul's churchyard, and there
staid till late, and it rained hard, so we were fain to get home wet, and
so to bed.

25th (Lord's day).  At church in the morning, and dined at home alone with
my wife very comfortably, and so again to church with her, and had a very
good and pungent sermon of Mr. Mills, discoursing the necessity of
restitution.  Home, and I found my Lady Batten and her daughter to look
something askew upon my wife, because my wife do not buckle to them, and
is not solicitous for their acquaintance, which I am not troubled at at
all.  By and by comes in my father (he intends to go into the country
to-morrow), and he and I among other discourse at last called Pall up to
us, and there in great anger told her before my father that I would keep
her no longer, and my father he said he would have nothing to do with her.
At last, after we had brought down her high spirit, I got my father to
yield that she should go into the country with my mother and him, and stay
there awhile to see how she will demean herself.  That being done, my
father and I to my uncle Wight's, and there supped, and he took his leave
of them, and so I walked with [him] as far as Paul's and there parted, and
I home, my mind at some rest upon this making an end with Pall, who do
trouble me exceedingly.

26th.  This morning before I went out I made even with my maid Jane, who
has this day been my maid three years, and is this day to go into the
country to her mother.  The poor girl cried, and I could hardly forbear
weeping to think of her going, for though she be grown lazy and spoilt by
Pall's coming, yet I shall never have one to please us better in all
things, and so harmless, while I live.  So I paid her her wages and gave
her 2s. 6d. over, and bade her adieu, with my mind full of trouble at her
going.  Hence to my father, where he and I and Thomas together setting
things even, and casting up my father's accounts, and upon the whole I
find that all he hath in money of his own due to him in the world is but
L45, and he owes about the same sum: so that I cannot but think in what a
condition he had left my mother if he should have died before my uncle
Robert.  Hence to Tom Trice for the probate of the will and had it done to
my mind, which did give my father and me good content.  From thence to my
Lady at the Wardrobe and thence to the Theatre, and saw the "Antipodes,"
wherein there is much mirth, but no great matter else. Hence with Mr.
Bostock whom I met there (a clerk formerly of Mr. Phelps) to the Devil
tavern, and there drank and so away.  I to my uncle Fenner's, where my
father was with him at an alehouse, and so we three went by ourselves and
sat talking a great while about a broker's daughter that he do propose for
a wife for Tom, with a great portion, but I fear it will not take, but he
will do what he can.  So we broke up, and going through the street we met
with a mother and son, friends of my father's man, Ned's, who are angry at
my father's putting him away, which troubled me and my father, but all
will be well as to that.  We have news this morning of my uncle Thomas and
his son Thomas being gone into the country without giving notice thereof
to anybody, which puts us to a stand, but I fear them not.  At night at
home I found a letter from my Lord Sandwich, who is now very well again of
his feaver, but not yet gone from Alicante, where he lay sick, and was
twice let blood.  This letter dated the 22nd July last, which puts me out
of doubt of his being ill.  In my coming home I called in at the Crane
tavern at the Stocks by appointment, and there met and took leave of Mr.
Fanshaw, who goes to-morrow and Captain Isham toward their voyage to
Portugal.  Here we drank a great deal of wine, I too much and Mr. Fanshaw
till he could hardly go.  So we took leave one of another.

27th.  This morning to the Wardrobe, and there took leave of my Lord
Hinchingbroke and his brother, and saw them go out by coach toward Rye in
their way to France, whom God bless.  Then I was called up to my Lady's
bedside, where we talked an hour about Mr. Edward Montagu's disposing of
the L5000 for my Lord's departure for Portugal, and our fears that he will
not do it to my Lord's honour, and less to his profit, which I am to
enquire a little after.  Hence to the office, and there sat till noon, and
then my wife and I by coach to my cozen, Thos. Pepys, the Executor, to
dinner, where some ladies and my father and mother, where very merry, but
methinks he makes but poor dinners for such guests, though there was a
poor venison pasty.  Hence my wife and I to the Theatre, and there saw
"The Joviall Crew," where the King, Duke and Duchess, and Madame Palmer,
were; and my wife, to her great content, had a full sight of them all the
while.  The play full of mirth.  Hence to my father's, and there staid to
talk a while and so by foot home by moonshine.  In my way and at home, my
wife making a sad story to me of her brother Balty's a condition, and
would have me to do something for him, which I shall endeavour to do, but
am afeard to meddle therein for fear I shall not be able to wipe my hands
of him again, when I once concern myself for him.  I went to bed, my wife
all the while telling me his case with tears, which troubled me.

28th.  At home all the morning setting papers in order.  At noon to the
Exchange, and there met with Dr. Williams by appointment, and with him
went up and down to look for an attorney, a friend of his, to advise with
about our bond of my aunt Pepys of L200, and he tells me absolutely that
we shall not be forced to pay interest for the money yet.  I do doubt it
very much.  I spent the whole afternoon drinking with him and so home.
This day I counterfeited a letter to Sir W. Pen, as from the thief that
stole his tankard lately, only to abuse and laugh at him.

29th.  At the office all the morning, and at noon my father, mother, and
my aunt Bell (the first time that ever she was at my house) come to dine
with me, and were very merry.  After dinner the two women went to visit my
aunt Wight, &c., and my father about other business, and I abroad to my
bookseller, and there staid till four o'clock, at which time by
appointment I went to meet my father at my uncle Fenner's.  So thither I
went and with him to an alehouse, and there came Mr. Evans, the taylor,
whose daughter we have had a mind to get for a wife for Tom, and then my
father, and there we sat a good while and talked about the business; in
fine he told us that he hath not to except against us or our motion, but
that the estate that God hath blessed him with is too great to give where
there is nothing in present possession but a trade and house; and so we
friendly ended.  There parted, my father and I together, and walked a
little way, and then at Holborn he and I took leave of one another, he
being to go to Brampton (to settle things against my mother comes)
tomorrow morning.  So I home.

30th.  At noon my wife and I met at the Wardrobe, and there dined with the
children, and after dinner up to my Lady's bedside, and talked and laughed
a good while.  Then my wife end I to Drury Lane to the French comedy,
which was so ill done, and the scenes and company and every thing else so
nasty and out of order and poor, that I was sick all the while in my mind
to be there.  Here my wife met with a son of my Lord Somersett, whom she
knew in France, a pretty man; I showed him no great countenance, to avoyd
further acquaintance.  That done, there being nothing pleasant but the
foolery of the farce, we went home.

31st.  At home and the office all the morning, and at noon comes Luellin
to me, and he and I to the tavern and after that to Bartholomew fair, and
there upon his motion to a pitiful alehouse, where we had a dirty slut or
two come up that were whores, but my very heart went against them, so that
I took no pleasure but a great deal of trouble in being there and getting
from thence for fear of being seen.  From hence he and I walked towards
Ludgate and parted.  I back again to the fair all alone, and there met
with my Ladies Jemimah and Paulina, with Mr. Pickering and Madamoiselle,
at seeing the monkeys dance, which was much to see, when they could be
brought to do so, but it troubled me to sit among such nasty company.
After that with them into Christ's Hospitall, and there Mr. Pickering
bought them some fairings, and I did give every one of them a bauble,
which was the little globes of glass with things hanging in them, which
pleased the ladies very well.  After that home with them in their coach,
and there was called up to my Lady, and she would have me stay to talk
with her, which I did I think a full hour.  And the poor lady did with so
much innocency tell me how Mrs. Crispe had told her that she did intend,
by means of a lady that lies at her house, to get the King to be godfather
to the young lady that she is in childbed now of; but to see in what a
manner my Lady told it me, protesting that she sweat in the very telling
of it, was the greatest pleasure to me in the world to see the simplicity
and harmlessness of a lady.  Then down to supper with the ladies, and so
home, Mr. Moore (as he and I cannot easily part) leading me as far as
Fenchurch Street to the Mitre, where we drank a glass of wine and so
parted, and I home and to bed.

Thus ends the month.  My maid Jane newly gone, and Pall left now to do all
the work till another maid comes, which shall not be till she goes away
into the country with my mother.  Myself and wife in good health. My Lord
Sandwich in the Straits and newly recovered of a great sickness at
Alicante.  My father gone to settle at Brampton, and myself under much
business and trouble for to settle things in the estate to our content.
But what is worst, I find myself lately too much given to seeing of plays,
and expense, and pleasure, which makes me forget my business, which I must
labour to amend.  No money comes in, so that I have been forced to borrow
a great deal for my own expenses, and to furnish my father, to leave
things in order.  I have some trouble about my brother Tom, who is now
left to keep my father's trade, in which I have great fears that he will
miscarry for want of brains and care.  At Court things are in very ill
condition, there being so much emulacion, poverty, and the vices of
drinking, swearing, and loose amours, that I know not what will be the end
of it, but confusion.  And the Clergy so high, that all people that I meet
with do protest against their practice.  In short, I see no content or
satisfaction any where, in any one sort of people. The Benevolence

     [A voluntary contribution made by the subjects to their sovereign.
     Upon this occasion the clergy alone gave L33,743: See May 31st,
     1661.--B]

proves so little, and an occasion of so much discontent every where; that
it had better it had never been set up.  I think to subscribe L20.  We are
at our Office quiet, only for lack of money all things go to rack. Our
very bills offered to be sold upon the Exchange at 10 per cent. loss.  We
are upon getting Sir R. Ford's house added to our Office.  But I see so
many difficulties will follow in pleasing of one another in the dividing
of it, and in becoming bound personally to pay the rent of L200 per annum,
that I do believe it will yet scarce come to pass.  The season very sickly
every where of strange and fatal fevers.




     ETEXT EDITOR'S BOOKMARKS:

     A great baboon, but so much like a man in most things
     A play not very good, though commended much
     Begun to smell, and so I caused it to be set forth (corpse)
     Bleeding behind by leeches will cure him
     By chewing of tobacco is become very fat and sallow
     Cannot bring myself to mind my business
     Durst not take notice of her, her husband being there
     Faced white coat, made of one of my wife's pettycoates
     Family being all in mourning, doing him the greatest honour
     Fear I shall not be able to wipe my hands of him again
     Finding my wife not sick, but yet out of order
     Found him not so ill as I thought that he had been ill
     Found my brother John at eight o'clock in bed, which vexed me
     Good God! how these ignorant people did cry her up for it!
     Greedy to see the will, but did not ask to see it till to-morrow
     His company ever wearys me
     I broke wind and so came to some ease
     I would fain have stolen a pretty dog that followed me
     Instructed by Shakespeare himself
     King, Duke and Duchess, and Madame Palmer, were
     Lady Batten how she was such a man's whore
     Lately too much given to seeing of plays, and expense
     Lewdness and beggary of the Court
     Look askew upon my wife, because my wife do not buckle to them
     None will sell us any thing without our personal security given
     Quakers do still continue, and rather grow than lessen
     Sat before Mrs. Palmer, the King's mistress, and filled my eyes
     So the children and I rose and dined by ourselves
     Sorry in some respect, glad in my expectations in another respec
     The Alchymist,--Comedy by Ben Jonson
     The Lords taxed themselves for the poor--an earl, s.
     This week made a vow to myself to drink no wine this week
     Those absent from prayers were to pay a forfeit
     To be so much in love of plays
     Woman with a rod in her hand keeping time to the musique





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Diary of Samuel Pepys,
June/July/August 1661, by Samuel Pepys

*** 