



Produced by Charles Keller





THE HARVESTER

By Gene Stratton-Porter


Author Of A Girl Of The Limberlost, Freckles, Etc.



                        THIS PORTION
               OF THE LIFE OF A MAN OF TO-DAY
          IS OFFERED IN THE HOPE THAT IN CLEANLINESS,
             POETIC TEMPERMENT, AND MENTAL FORCE,
                    A LIKENESS WILL BE SEEN
                            TO
                     HENRY DAVID THOREAU




CHAPTER

     I.     Belshazzar's Decision
     II.    The Effect of a Dream
     III.   Harvesting the Forest
     IV.    A Commission for the South Wind
     V.     When the Harvester Made Good
     VI.    To Labour and to Wait
     VII.   The Quest of the Dream Girl
     VIII.  Belshazzar's Record Point
     IX.    The Harvester Goes Courting
     X.     The Chime of the Blue Bells
     XI.    Demonstrated Courtship
     XII.   ''The Way of a Man with a Maid''
     XIII.  When the Dream Came True
     XIV.   Snowy Wings
     XV.    The Harvester Interprets Life
     XVI.   Granny Moreland's Visit
     XVII.  Love Invades Science
     XVIII. The Better Man
     XIX.   A Vertical Spine
     XX.    The Man in the Background
     XXI.   The Coming of the Bluebird


CHARACTERS

     DAVID LANGSTON, A Harvester of the Woods.
     RUTH JAMESON, A Girl of the City.
     GRANNY MORELAND, An Interested Neighbour.
     DR. CAREY, Chief Surgeon of the Onabasha Hospital.
     MRS. CAREY, Wife of the Doctor.
     DR. HARMON, Who Concludes to Leave the City.
     MOLLY BARNET, A Hospital Nurse with a Heart.
     HENRY JAMESON, A Trader Without a Heart.
     ALEXANDER HERRON, Who Made a Concession.
     MRS. HERRON, A Gentle Woman.
     THE KENNEDYS, Philadelphia Lawyers.




THE HARVESTER



CHAPTER I. BELSHAZZAR'S DECISION

"Bel, come here!" The Harvester sat in the hollow worn in the hewed log
stoop by the feet of his father and mother and his own sturdier tread,
and rested his head against the casing of the cabin door when he gave
the command. The tip of the dog's nose touched the gravel between his
paws as he crouched flat on earth, with beautiful eyes steadily watching
the master, but he did not move a muscle.

"Bel, come here!"

Twinkles flashed in the eyes of the man when he repeated the order,
while his voice grew more imperative as he stretched a lean, wiry
hand toward the dog. The animal's eyes gleamed and his sensitive nose
quivered, yet he lay quietly.

"Belshazzar, kommen Sie hier!"

The body of the dog arose on straightened legs and his muzzle dropped
in the outstretched palm. A wind slightly perfumed with the odour of
melting snow and unsheathing buds swept the lake beside them, and lifted
a waving tangle of light hair on the brow of the man, while a level ray
of the setting sun flashed across the water and illumined the graven,
sensitive face, now alive with keen interest in the game being played.

"Bel, dost remember the day?" inquired the Harvester.

The eager attitude and anxious eyes of the dog betrayed that he did not,
but was waiting with every sense alert for a familiar word that would
tell him what was expected.

"Surely you heard the killdeers crying in the night," prompted the man.
"I called your attention when the ecstasy of the first bluebird waked
the dawn. All day you have seen the gold-yellow and blood-red osiers,
the sap-wet maples and spring tracing announcements of her arrival on
the sunny side of the levee."

The dog found no clew, but he recognized tones he loved in the suave,
easy voice, and his tail beat his sides in vigorous approval. The man
nodded gravely.

"Ah, so! Then you realize this day to be the most important of all the
coming year to me; this hour a solemn one that influences my whole after
life. It is time for your annual decision on my fate for a twelve-month.
Are you sure you are fully alive to the gravity of the situation, Bel?"

The dog felt himself safe in answering a rising inflection ending in his
name uttered in that tone, and wagged eager assent.

"Well then," said the man, "which shall it be? Do I leave home for the
noise and grime of the city, open an office and enter the money-making
scramble?"

Every word was strange to the dog, almost breathlessly waiting for a
familiar syllable. The man gazed steadily into the animal's eyes. After
a long pause he continued:

"Or do I remain at home to harvest the golden seal, mullein, and
ginseng, not to mention an occasional hour with the black bass or tramps
for partridge and cotton-tails?"

The dog recognized each word of that. Before the voice ceased, his sleek
sides were quivering, his nostrils twitching, his tail lashing, and at
the pause he leaped up and thrust his nose against the face of the man.
The Harvester leaned back laughing in deep, full-chested tones; then he
patted the dog's head with one hand and renewed his grip with the other.

"Good old Bel!" he cried exultantly. "Six years you have decided for me,
and right----every time! We are of the woods, Bel, born and reared
here as our fathers before us. What would we of the camp fire, the long
trail, the earthy search, we harvesters of herbs the famous chemists
require, what would we do in a city? And when the sap is rising, the
bass splashing, and the wild geese honking in the night! We never could
endure it, Bel.

"When we delivered that hemlock at the hospital to-day, did you hear
that young doctor talking about his 'lid'? Well up there is ours, old
fellow! Just sky and clouds overhead for us, forest wind in our faces,
wild perfume in our nostrils, muck on our feet, that's the life for us.
Our blood was tainted to begin with, and we've lived here so long it
is now a passion in our hearts. If ever you sentence us to life in the
city, you'll finish both of us, that's what you'll do! But you won't,
will you? You realize what God made us for and what He made for us,
don't you, Bel?"

As he lovingly patted the dog's head the man talked and the animal
trembled with delight. Then the voice of the Harvester changed and
dropped to tones of gravest import.

"Now how about that other matter, Bel? You always decide that too. The
time has come again. Steady now! This is far more important than the
other. Just to be wiped out, Bel, pouf! That isn't anything and it
concerns no one save ourselves. But to bring misery into our lives
and live with it daily, that would be a condition to rend the soul. So
careful, Bel! Cautious now!"

The voice of the man dropped to a whisper as he asked the question.

"What about the girl business?"

Trembling with eagerness to do the thing that would bring more
caressing, bewildered by unfamiliar words and tones, the dog hesitated.

"Do I go on as I have ever since mother left me, rustling for grub,
living in untrammelled freedom? Do I go on as before, Bel?"

The Harvester paused and waited the answer, with anxiety in his eyes
as he searched the beast face. He had talked to that dog, as most
men commune with their souls, for so long and played the game in such
intense earnest that he felt the results final with him. The animal was
immovable now, lost again, his anxious eyes watching the face of the
master, his eager ears waiting for words he recognized. After a long
time the man continued slowly and hesitantly, as if fearing the outcome.
He did not realize that there was sufficient anxiety in his voice to
change its tones.

"Or do I go courting this year? Do I rig up in uncomfortable
store-clothes, and parade before the country and city girls and try to
persuade the one I can get, probably----not the one I would want----to
marry me, and come here and spoil all our good times? Do we want a
woman around scolding if we are away from home, whining because she is
lonesome, fretting for luxuries we cannot afford to give her? Are you
going to let us in for a scrape like that, Bel?"

The bewildered dog could bear the unusual scene no longer. Taking the
rising inflection, that sounded more familiar, for a cue, and his name
for a certainty, he sprang forward, his tail waving as his nose touched
the face of the Harvester. Then he shot across the driveway and lay in
the spice thicket, half the ribs of one side aching, as he howled from
the lowest depths of dog misery.

"You ungrateful cur!" cried the Harvester. "What has come over you? Six
years I have trusted you, and the answer has been right, every time!
Confound your picture! Sentence me to tackle the girl proposition! I
see myself! Do you know what it would mean? For the first thing you'd
be chained, while I pranced over the country like a half-broken colt,
trying to attract some girl. I'd have to waste time I need for my work
and spend money that draws good interest while we sleep, to tempt her
with presents. I'd have to rebuild the cabin and there's not a chance in
ten she would not fret the life out of me whining to go to the city to
live, arrange for her here the best I could. Of all the fool, unreliable
dogs that ever trod a man's tracks, you are the limit! And you never
before failed me! You blame, degenerate pup, you!"

The Harvester paused for breath and the dog subsided to a pitiful
whimper. He was eager to return to the man who had struck him the first
blow his pampered body ever had received; but he could not understand a
kick and harsh words for him, so he lay quivering with anxiety and fear.

"You howling, whimpering idiot!" exclaimed the Harvester. "Choose a
day like this to spoil! Air to intoxicate a mummy! Roots swelling! Buds
bursting! Harvest close and you'd call me off and put me at work like
that, would you? If I ever had supposed lost all your senses, I never
would have asked you. Six years you have decided my fate, when the first
bluebird came, and you've been true blue every time. If I ever trust you
again! But the mischief is done now.

"Have you forgotten that your name means 'to protect?' Don't you
remember it is because of that, it is your name? Protect! I'd have
trusted you with my life, Bell! You gave it to me the time you pointed
that rattler within six inches of my fingers in the blood-root bed.
You saw the falling limb in time to warn me. You always know where the
quicksands lie. But you are protecting me now, like sin, ain't you?
Bring a girl here to spoil both our lives! Not if I know myself!
Protect!"

The man arose and going inside the cabin closed the door. After that the
dog lay in abject misery so deep that two big tears squeezed from his
eyes and rolled down his face. To be shut out was worse than the blow.
He did not take the trouble to arise from the wet leaves covering the
cold earth, but closing his eyes went to sleep.

The man leaned against the door and ran his fingers through his hair as
he anathematized the dog. Slowly his eyes travelled around the room. He
saw his tumbled bed by the open window facing the lake, the small
table with his writing material, the crude rack on the wall loaded
with medical works, botanies, drug encyclopaedias, the books of the few
authors who interested him, and the bare, muck-tracked floor. He went
to the kitchen, where he built a fire in the cook stove, and to the
smoke-house, from which he returned with a slice of ham and some eggs.
He set some potatoes boiling and took bread, butter and milk from the
pantry. Then he laid a small note-book on the table before him and
studied the transactions of the day.

     10 lbs. wild cherry bark      6 cents       $.60
     5   "   wahoo root bark      25 "           1.25
     20  "   witch hazel bark      5 "           1.00
     5   "   blue flag root       12 "           .60
     10  "   snake root           18 "           1.80
     10  "   blood root           12 "           1.20
     15  "   hoarhound            10 "           1.50
                                                 -----
                                                $7.95


"Not so bad," he muttered, bending over the figures. "I wonder if any
of my neighbours who harvest the fields average as well at this season.
I'll wager they don't. That's pretty fair! Some days I don't make it,
and then when a consignment of seeds go or ginseng is wanted the cash
comes in right properly. I could waste half of it on a girl and yet save
money. But where is the woman who would be content with half? She'd want
all and fret because there wasn't more. Blame that dog!"

He put the book in his pocket, prepared and ate his supper, heaped a
plate generously, placed it on the floor beneath the table, and set away
the food that remained.

"Not that you deserve it," he said to space. "You get this in honour
of your distinguished name and the faithfulness with which you formerly
have lived up to its import. If you hadn't been a dog with more sense
than some men, I wouldn't take your going back on me now so hard. One
would think an animal of your intelligence might realize that you would
get as much of a dose as I. Would she permit you to eat from a plate on
the kitchen floor? Not on your life, Belshazzar! Frozen scraps around
the door for you! Would she allow you to sleep across the foot of the
bed? Ho, ho, ho! Would she have you tracking on her floor? It would be
the barn, and growling you didn't do at that. If I'd serve you right,
I'd give you a dose and allow you to see how you like it. But it's
cutting off my nose to spite my face, as the old adage goes, for
whatever she did to a dog, she'd probably do worse to a man. I think
not!"

He entered the front room and stood before a long shelf on which were
arranged an array of partially completed candlesticks carved from wood.
There were black and white walnut, red, white, and golden oak, cherry
and curly maple, all in original designs. Some of them were oddities,
others were failures, but most of them were unusually successful. He
selected one of black walnut, carved until the outline of his pattern
was barely distinguishable. He was imitating the trunk of a tree with
the bark on, the spreading, fern-covered roots widening for the base,
from which a vine sprang. Near the top was the crude outline of a big
night moth climbing toward the light. He stood turning this stick with
loving hands and holding it from him for inspection.

"I am going to master you!" he exulted. "Your lines are right. The
design balances and it's graceful. If I have any trouble it will be with
the moth, and I think I can manage. I've got to decide whether to use
cecropia or polyphemus before long. Really, on a walnut, and in
the woods, it should be a luna, according to the eternal fitness of
things----but I'm afraid of the trailers. They turn over and half curl
and I believe I had better not tackle them for a start. I'll use the
easiest to begin on, and if I succeed I'll duplicate the pattern and try
a luna then. The beauties!"

The Harvester selected a knife from the box and began carving the stick
slowly and carefully. His brain was busy, for presently he glanced at
the floor.

"She'd object to that!" he said emphatically. "A man could no more sit
and work where he pleased than he could fly. At least I know mother
never would have it, and she was no nagger, either. What a mother she
was! If one only could stop the lonely feeling that will creep in, and
the aching hunger born with the body, for a mate; if a fellow only
could stop it with a woman like mother! How she revelled in sunshine and
beauty! How she loved earth and air! How she went straight to the marrow
of the finest line in the best book I could bring from the library! How
clean and true she was and how unyielding! I can hear her now, holding
me with her last breath to my promise. If I could marry a girl like
mother----great Caesar! You'd see me buying an automobile to make the
run to the county clerk. Wouldn't that be great! Think of coming in from
a long, difficult day, to find a hot supper, and a girl such as she must
have been, waiting for me! Bel, if I thought there was a woman similar
to her in all the world, and I had even the ghost of a chance to win
her, I'd call you in and forgive you. But I know the girls of to-day. I
pass them on the roads, on the streets, see them in the cafe's, stores,
and at the library. Why even the nurses at the hospital, for all the
gravity of their positions, are a giggling, silly lot; and they never
know that the only time they look and act presentably to me is when they
stop their chatter, put on their uniforms, and go to work. Some of them
are pretty, then. There's a little blue-eyed one, but all she needs is
feathers to make her a 'ha! ha! bird.' Drat that dog!"

The Harvester took the candlestick and the box of knives, opened the
door, and returned to the stoop. Belshazzar arose, pleading in his eyes,
and cautiously advanced a few steps. The man bent over his work and paid
not the slightest heed, so the discouraged dog sank to earth and fixedly
watched the unresponsive master. The carving of the candlestick went
on steadily. Occasionally the Harvester lifted his head and repeatedly
sucked his lungs full of air. Sometimes for an instant he scanned the
surface of the lake for signs of breaking fish or splash of migrant
water bird. Again his gaze wandered up the steep hill, crowned with
giant trees, whose swelling buds he could see and smell. Straight before
him lay a low marsh, through which the little creek that gurgled and
tumbled down hill curved, crossed the drive some distance below, and
entered the lake of Lost Loons.

While the trees were bare, and when the air was clear as now, he could
see the spires of Onabasha, five miles away, intervening cultivated
fields, stretches of wood, the long black line of the railway, and
the swampy bottom lands gradually rising to the culmination of the
tree-crowned summit above him. His cocks were crowing warlike challenges
to rivals on neighbouring farms. His hens were carolling their spring
egg-song. In the barn yard ganders were screaming stridently. Over the
lake and the cabin, with clapping snowy wings, his white doves circled
in a last joy-flight before seeking their cotes in the stable loft. As
the light grew fainter, the Harvester worked slower. Often he leaned
against the casing, and closed his eyes to rest them. Sometimes he
whistled snatches of old songs to which his mother had cradled him, and
again bits of opera and popular music he had heard on the streets of
Onabasha. As he worked, the sun went down and a half moon appeared above
the wood across the lake. Once it seemed as if it were a silver bowl set
on the branch of a giant oak; higher, it rested a tilted crescent on the
rim of a cloud.

The dog waited until he could endure it no longer, and straightening
from his crouching position, he took a few velvet steps forward, making
faint, whining sounds in his throat. When the man neither turned his
head nor gave him a glance, Belshazzar sank to earth again, satisfied
for the moment with being a little closer. Across Loon Lake came the
wavering voice of a night love song. The Harvester remembered that as a
boy he had shrunk from those notes until his mother explained that they
were made by a little brown owl asking for a mate to come and live
in his hollow tree. Now he rather liked the sound. It was eloquent of
earnest pleading. With the lonely bird on one side, and the reproachful
dog eyes on the other, the man grinned rather foolishly.

Between two fires, he thought. If that dog ever catches my eye he will
come tearing as a cyclone, and I would not kick him again for a hundred
dollars. First time I ever struck him, and didn't intend to then. So
blame mad and disappointed my foot just shot out before I knew it. There
he lies half dead to make up, but I'm blest if I forgive him in a hurry.
And there is that insane little owl screeching for a mate. If I'd start
out making sounds like that, all the girls would line up and compete for
possession of my happy home.

The Harvester laughed and at the sound Belshazzar took courage and
advanced five steps before he sank belly to earth again. The owl
continued its song. The Harvester imitated the cry and at once it
responded. He called again and leaned back waiting. The notes came
closer. The Harvester cried once more and peered across the lake,
watching for the shadow of silent wings. The moon was high above the
trees now, the knife dropped in the box, the long fingers closed around
the stick, the head rested against the casing, and the man intoned
the cry with all his skill, and then watched and waited. He had been
straining his eyes over the carving until they were tired, and when
he watched for the bird the moonlight tried them; for it touched the
lightly rippling waves of the lake in a line of yellow light that
stretched straight across the water from the opposite bank, directly to
the gravel bed below, where lay the bathing pool. It made a path of gold
that wavered and shimmered as the water moved gently, but it appeared
sufficiently material to resemble a bridge spanning the lake.

"Seems as if I could walk it," muttered the Harvester.

The owl cried again and the man intently watched the opposite bank. He
could not see the bird, but in the deep wood where he thought it might
be he began to discern a misty, moving shimmer of white. Marvelling, he
watched closer. So slowly he could not detect motion it advanced, rising
in height and taking shape.

"Do I end this day by seeing a ghost?" he queried.

He gazed intently and saw that a white figure really moved in the woods
of the opposite bank.

"Must be some boys playing fool pranks!" exclaimed the Harvester.

He watched fixedly with interested face, and then amazement wiped
out all other expression and he sat motionless, breathless, looking,
intently looking. For the white object came straight toward the water
and at the very edge unhesitatingly stepped upon the bridge of gold and
lightly, easily advanced in his direction. The man waited. On came
the figure and as it drew closer he could see that it was a very tall,
extremely slender woman, wrapped in soft robes of white. She stepped
along the slender line of the gold bridge with grace unequalled.

From the water arose a shining mist, and behind the advancing figure
a wall of light outlined and rimmed her in a setting of gold. As she
neared the shore the Harvester's blood began to race in his veins and
his lips parted in wonder. First she was like a slender birch trunk,
then she resembled a wild lily, and soon she was close enough to prove
that she was young and very lovely. Heavy braids of dark hair rested
on her head as a coronet. Her forehead was low and white. Her eyes were
wide-open wells of darkness, her rounded cheeks faintly pink, and her
red lips smiling invitation. Her throat was long, very white, and the
hands that caught up the fleecy robe around her were rose- and
slender. In a panic the Harvester saw that the trailing robe swept the
undulant gold water, but was not wet; the feet that alternately showed
as she advanced were not purple with cold, but warm with a pink glow.

She was coming straight toward him, wonderful, alluring, lovely beyond
any woman the Harvester ever had seen. Straightway the fountains of
twenty-six years' repression overflowed in the breast of the man and all
his being ran toward her in a wave of desire. On she came, and now her
tender feet were on the white gravel. When he could see clearly she was
even more beautiful than she had appeared at a distance. He opened his
lips, but no sound came. He struggled to rise, but his legs would not
bear his weight. Helpless, he sank against the casing. The girl walked
to his feet, bent, placed a hand on each of his shoulders, and smiled
into his eyes. He could scent the flower-like odour of her body and
wrapping, even her hair. He struggled frantically to speak to her as she
leaned closer, yet closer, and softly but firmly laid lips of pulsing
sweetness on his in a deliberate kiss.

The Harvester was on his feet now. Belshazzar shrank into the shadows.

"Come back!" cried the man. "Come back! For the love of mercy, where are
you?"

He ran stumblingly toward the lake. The bridge of gold was there, the
little owl cried lonesomely; and did he see or did he only dream he saw
a mist of white vanishing in the opposite wood?

His breath came between dry lips, and he circled the cabin searching
eagerly, but he could find nothing, hear nothing, save the dog at his
heels. He hurried to the stoop and stood gazing at the molten path of
moonlight. One minute he was half frozen, the next a rosy glow enfolded
him. Slowly he lifted a hand and touched his lips. Then he raised his
eyes from the water and swept the sky in a penetrant gaze.

"My gracious Heavenly Father," said the Harvester reverently. "Would it
be like that?"



CHAPTER II. THE EFFECT OF A DREAM

Fully convinced at last that he had been dreaming, the Harvester picked
up his knives and candlestick and entered the cabin. He placed them on a
shelf and turned away, but after a second's hesitation he closed the
box and arranged the sticks neatly. Then he set the room in order and
carefully swept the floor. As he replaced the broom he thought for an
instant, then opened the door and whistled softly. Belshazzar came at a
rush. The Harvester pushed the plate of food toward the hungry dog and
he ate greedily. The man returned to the front room and closed the door.

He stood a long time before his shelf of books, at last selected a
volume of "Medicinal Plants" and settled to study. His supper finished,
Belshazzar came scratching and whining at the door. Several times the
man lifted his head and glanced in that direction, but he only returned
to his book and read again. Tired and sleepy, at last, he placed the
volume on the shelf, went to a closet for a pair of bath towels, and
hung them across a chair. Then he undressed, opened the door, and ran
for the lake. He plunged with a splash and swam vigorously for a few
minutes, his white body growing pink under the sting of the chilled
water. Over and over he scanned the golden bridge to the moon, and stood
an instant dripping on the gravel of the landing to make sure that no
dream woman was crossing the wavering floor! He rubbed to a glow and
turned back the covers of his bed. The door and window stood wide.
Before he lay down, the Harvester paused in arrested motion a second,
then stepped to the kitchen door and lifted the latch.

As the man drew the covers over him, the dog's nose began making
an opening, and a little later he quietly walked into the room. The
Harvester rested, facing the lake. The dog sniffed at his shoulder, but
the man was rigid. Then the click of nails could be heard on the floor
as Belshazzar went to the opposite side. At his accustomed place he
paused and set one foot on the bed. There was not a sound, so he lifted
the other. Then one at a time he drew up his hind feet and crouched
as he had on the gravel. The man lay watching the bright bridge. The
moonlight entered the window and flooded the room. The strong lines on
the weather-beaten face of the Harvester were mellowed in the light, and
he appeared young and good to see. His lithe figure stretched the length
of the bed, his hair appeared almost white, and his face, touched by the
glorifying light of the moon, was a study.

One instant his countenance was swept with ultimate scorn; then
gradually that would fade and the lines soften, until his lips curved in
child-like appeal and his eyes were filled with pleading. Several
times he lifted a hand and gently touched his lips, as if a kiss were a
material thing and would leave tangible evidence of having been given.
After a long time his eyes closed and he scarcely was unconscious before
Belshazzar's cold nose touched the outstretched hand and the Harvester
lifted and laid it on the dog's head.

"Forgive me, Bel," he muttered. "I never did that. I wouldn't have hurt
you for anything. It happened before I had time to think."

They both fell asleep. The clear-cut lines of manly strength on the face
of the Harvester were touched to tender beauty. He lay smiling softly.
Far in the night he realized the frost-chill and divided the coverlet
with the happy Belshazzar.

The golden dream never came again. There was no need. It had done its
perfect work. The Harvester awoke the next morning a different man. His
face was youthful and alive with alert anticipation. He began his work
with eager impetuosity, whistling and singing the while, and he found
time to play with and talk to Belshazzar, until that glad beast almost
wagged off his tail in delight. They breakfasted together and arranged
the rooms with unusual care.

"You see," explained the Harvester to the dog, "we must walk neatly
after this. Maybe there is such a thing as fate. Possibly your answer
was right. There might be a girl in the world for me. I don't expect it,
but there is a possibility that she may find us before we locate
her. Anyway, we should work and be ready. All the old stock in the
store-house goes out as soon as we can cart it. A new cabin shall rise
as fast as we can build it. There must be a basement and furnace, too.
Dream women don't have cold feet, but if there is a girl living like
that, and she is coming to us or waiting for us to come to her, we must
have a comfortable home to offer. There should be a bathroom, too. She
couldn't dip in the lake as we do. And until we build the new house we
must keep the old one clean, just on the chance of her happening on us.
She might be visiting some of the neighbours or come from town with some
one or I might see her on the street or at the library or hospital or in
some of the stores. For the love of mercy, help me watch for her, Bel!
The half of my kingdom if you will point her for me!"

The Harvester worked as he talked. He set the rooms in order, put away
the remains of breakfast, and started to the stable. He turned back and
stood for a long time, scanning the face in the kitchen mirror. Once he
went to the door, then he hesitated, and finally took out his shaving
set and used it carefully and washed vigorously. He pulled his shirt
together at the throat, and hunting among his clothing, found an old
red tie that he knotted around his neck. This so changed his every-day
appearance that he felt wonderfully dressed and whistled gaily on his
way to the barn. There he confided in the old gray mare as he curried
and harnessed her to the spring wagon.

"Hardly know me, do you, Betsy?" he inquired. "Well, I'll explain. Our
friend Bel, here, has doomed me to go courting this year. Wouldn't that
durnfound you? I was mad as hornets at first, but since I've slept on
the idea, I rather like it. Maybe we are too lonely and dull. Perhaps
the right woman would make life a very different matter. Last night
I saw her, Betsy, and between us, I can't tell even you. She was the
loveliest, sweetest girl on earth, and that is all I can say. We are
going to watch for her to-day, and every trip we make, until we find
her, if it requires a hundred years. Then some glad time we are going to
locate her, and when we do, well, you just keep your eye on us, Betsy,
and you'll see how courting straight from the heart is done, even if we
lack experience."

Intoxicated with new and delightful sensations his tongue worked faster
than his hands.

"I don't mind telling you, old faithful, that I am in love this
morning," he said. "In love heels over, Betsy, for the first time in all
my life. If any man ever was a bigger fool than I am to-day, it would
comfort me to know about it. I am acting like an idiot, Betsy. I know
that, but I wish you could understand how I feel. Power! I am the
head-waters of Niagara! I could pluck down the stars and set them in
different places! I could twist the tail from the comet! I could twirl
the globe on my palm and topple mountains and wipe lakes from the
surface! I am a live man, Betsy. Existence is over. So don't you go at
any tricks or I might pull off your head. Betsy, if you see the tallest
girl you ever saw, and she wears a dark diadem, and has big black eyes
and a face so lovely it blinds you, why you have seen Her, and you balk,
right on the spot, and stand like the rock of Gibraltar, until you
make me see her, too. As if I wouldn't know she was coming a mile away!
There's more I could tell you, but that is my secret, and it's too
precious to talk about, even to my best friends. Bel, bring Betsy to the
store-room."

The Harvester tossed the hitching strap to the dog and walked down the
driveway to a low structure built on the embankment beside the lake.
One end of it was a dry-house of his own construction. Here, by an
arrangement of hot water pipes, he evaporated many of the barks, roots,
seeds, and leaves he grew to supply large concerns engaged in the
manufacture of drugs. By his process crude stock was thoroughly cured,
yet did not lose in weight and colour as when dried in the sun or
outdoor shade.

So the Harvester was enabled to send his customers big packages of
brightly  raw material, and the few cents per pound he asked in
advance of the catalogued prices were paid eagerly. He lived alone,
and never talked of his work; so none of the harvesters of the fields
adjoining dreamed of the extent of his reaping. The idea had been his
own. He had been born in the cabin in which he now lived. His father and
grandfather were old-time hunters of skins and game. They had added to
their earnings by gathering in spring and fall the few medicinal seeds,
leaves, and barks they knew. His mother had been of different type. She
had loved and married the picturesque young hunter, and gone to live
with him on the section of land taken by his father. She found life,
real life, vastly different from her girlhood dreams, but she was one of
those changeless, unyielding women who suffer silently, but never rue a
bargain, no matter how badly they are cheated. Her only joy in life had
been her son. For him she had worked and saved unceasingly, and when he
was old enough she sent him to the city to school and kept pace with him
in the lessons he brought home at night.

Using what she knew of her husband's work as a guide, and profiting by
pamphlets published by the government, every hour of the time outside
school and in summer vacations she worked in the woods with the boy,
gathering herbs and roots to pay for his education and clothing. So
the son passed the full high-school course, and then, selecting such
branches as interested him, continued his studies alone.

From books and drug pamphlets he had learned every medicinal plant,
shrub, and tree of his vicinity, and for years roamed far afield and
through the woods collecting. After his father's death expenses grew
heavier and the boy saw that he must earn more money. His mother
frantically opposed his going to the city, so he thought out the plan
of transplanting the stuff he gathered, to the land they owned and
cultivating it there. This work was well developed when he was twenty,
but that year he lost his mother.

From that time he went on steadily enlarging his species, transplanting
trees, shrubs, vines, and medicinal herbs from such locations as he
found them to similar conditions on his land. Six years he had worked
cultivating these beds, and hunting through the woods on the river
banks, government land, the great Limberlost Swamp, and neglected
corners of earth for barks and roots. He occasionally made long trips
across the country for rapidly diminishing plants he found in the
woodland of men who did not care to bother with a few specimens,
and many big beds of profitable herbs, extinct for miles around, now
flourished on the banks of Loon Lake, in the marsh, and through the
forest rising above. To what extent and value his venture had grown, no
one save the Harvester knew. When his neighbours twitted him with
being too lazy to plow and sow, of "mooning" over books, and derisively
sneered when they spoke of him as the Harvester of the Woods or the
Medicine Man, David Langston smiled and went his way.

How lonely he had been since the death of his mother he never realized
until that morning when a new idea really had taken possession of him.
From the store-house he heaped packages of seeds, dried leaves, barks,
and roots into the wagon. But he kept a generous supply of each, for he
prided himself on being able to fill all orders that reached him. Yet
the load he took to the city was much larger than usual. As he drove
down the hill and passed the cabin he studied the location.

"The drainage is perfect," he said to Belshazzar beside him on the seat.
"So is the situation. We get the cool breezes from the lake in summer
and the hillside warmth in winter. View down the valley can't be
surpassed. We will grub out that thicket in front, move over the
driveway, and build a couple of two-story rooms, with basement for
cellar and furnace, and a bathroom in front of the cabin and use it with
some fixing over for a dining-room and kitchen. Then we will deepen and
widen Singing Water, stick a bushel of bulbs and roots and sow a peck of
flower seeds in the marsh, plant a hedge along the drive, and straighten
the lake shore a little. I can make a beautiful wild-flower garden and
arrange so that with one season's work this will appear very well. We
will express this stuff and then select and fell some trees to-night.
Soon as the frost is out of the ground we will dig our basement and lay
the foundations. The neighbours will help me raise the logs; after that
I can finish the inside work. I've got some dried maple, cherry,
and walnut logs that would work into beautiful furniture. I haven't
forgotten the prices McLean offered me. I can use it as well as he.
Plain way the best things are built now, I believe I could make tables
and couches myself. I can see plans in the magazines at the library.
I'll take a look when I get this off. I feel strong enough to do all of
it in a few days and I am crazy to commence. But I scarcely know where
to begin. There are about fifty things I'd like to do. But to fell and
dry the trees and get the walls up come first, I believe. What do you
think, old unreliable?"

Belshazzar thought the world was a place of beauty that morning. He
sniffed the icy, odorous air and with tilted head watched the birds.
A wearied band of ducks had settled on Loon Lake to feed and rest,
for there was nothing to disturb them. Signs were numerous everywhere
prohibiting hunters from firing over the Harvester's land. Beside
the lake, down the valley, crossing the railroad, and in the farther
lowlands, the dog was a nervous quiver, as he constantly scented game
or saw birds he wanted to point. But when they neared the city, he sat
silently watching everything with alert eyes. As they reached the outer
fringe of residences the Harvester spoke to him.

"Now remember, Bel," he said. "Point me the tallest girl you ever saw,
with a big braid of dark hair, shining black eyes, and red velvet lips,
sweeter than wild crab apple blossoms. Make a dead set! Don't allow her
to pass us. Heaven is going to begin in Medicine Woods when we find her
and prove to her that there lies her happy home.

"When we find her," repeated the Harvester softly and exultantly. "When
we find her!"

He said it again and again, pronouncing the words with tender
modulations. Because he was chanting it in his soul, in his heart,
in his brain, with his lips, he had a hasty glance for every woman
he passed. Light hair, blue eyes, and short figures got only casual
inspection: but any tall girl with dark hair and eyes endured rather
close scrutiny that morning. He drove to the express office and
delivered his packages and then to the hospital. In the hall the
blue-eyed nurse met him and cried gaily, "Good morning, Medicine Man!"

"Ugh! I scalp pale-faces!" threatened the Harvester, but the girl was
not afraid and stood before him laughing. She might have gone her way
quite as well. She could not have differed more from the girl of the
newly begun quest. The man merely touched his wide-brimmed hat as he
walked around her and entered the office of the chief surgeon.

A slender, gray-eyed man with white hair turned from his desk, smiled
warmly, pushed a chair, and reached a welcoming hand.

"Ah good-morning, David," he cried. "You bring the very breath of spring
with you. Are you at the maples yet?"

"Begin to-morrow," was the answer. "I want to get all my old stock off
hands. Sugar water comes next, and then the giddy sassafras and spring
roots rush me, and after that, harvest begins full force, and all
my land is teeming. This is going to be a big year. Everything is
sufficiently advanced to be worth while. I have decided to enlarge the
buildings."

"Store-room too small?"

"Everything!" said the Harvester comprehensively. "I am crowded
everywhere."

The keen gray eyes bent on him searchingly.

"Ho, ho!" laughed the doctor. "'Crowded everywhere.' I had not heard of
cramped living quarters before. When did you meet her?"

"Last night," replied the Harvester. "Her home is already in
construction. I chose seven trees as I drove here that are going to fall
before night."

So casual was the tone the doctor was disarmed.

"I am trying your nerve remedy," he said.

Instantly the Harvester tingled with interest.

"How does it work?" he inquired.

"Finely! Had a case that presented just the symptoms you mentioned.
High-school girl broken down from trying to lead her classes, lead her
fraternity, lead her parents, lead society----the Lord only knows what
else. Gone all to pieces! Pretty a case of nervous prostration as you
ever saw in a person of fifty. I began on fractional doses with it, and
at last got her where she can rest. It did precisely what you claimed it
would, David."

"Good!" cried the Harvester. "Good! I hoped it would be effective.
Thank you for the test. It will give me confidence when I go before the
chemists with it. I've got a couple more compounds I wish you would try
when you have safe cases where you can do no harm."

"You are cautious for a young man, son!"

"The woods do that. You not only discover miracles and marvels in them,
you not only trace evolution and the origin of species, but you get
the greatest lessons taught in all the world ground into you early and
alone----courage, caution, and patience."

"Those are the rocks on which men are stranded as a rule. You think you
can breast them, David?"

The Harvester laughed.

"Aside from breaking a certain promise mother rooted in the blood and
bones of me, if I am afraid of anything, I don't know it. You don't
often see me going head-long, do you? As to patience! Ten years ago I
began removing every tree, bush, vine, and plant of medicinal value from
the woods around to my land; I set and sowed acres in ginseng, knowing
I must nurse, tend, and cultivate seven years. If my neighbours had
understood what I was attempting, what do you think they would have
said? Cranky and lazy would have become adjectives too mild. Lunatic
would have expressed it better. That's close the general opinion,
anyway. Because I will not fell my trees, and the woods hide the work I
do, it is generally conceded that I spend my time in the sun reading
a book. I do, as often as I have an opportunity. But the point is that
this fall, when I harvest that ginseng bed, I will clear more money than
my stiffest detractor ever saw at one time. I'll wager my bank account
won't compare so unfavourably with the best of them now. I did well
this morning. Yes, I'll admit this much: I am reasonably cautious, I'm
a pattern for patience, and my courage never has failed me yet, anyway.
But I must rap on wood; for that boast is a sign that I probably will
meet my Jonah soon."

"David, you are a man after my own heart," said the doctor. "I love you
more than any other friend I have I wouldn't see a hair of your head
changed for the world. Now I've got to hurry to my operation. Remain as
long as you please if there is anything that interests you; but don't
let the giggling little nurse that always haunts the hall when you come
make any impression. She is not up to your standard."

"Don't!" said the Harvester. "I've learned one of the big lessons of
life since last I saw you, Doc. I have no standard. There is just one
woman in all the world for me, and when I find her I will know her, and
I will be happy for even a glance; as for that talk of standards, I will
be only too glad to take her as she is."

"David! I supposed what you said about enlarged buildings was nonsense
or applied to store-rooms."

"Go to your operation!"

"David, if you send me in suspense, I may operate on the wrong man. What
has happened?"

"Nothing!" said the Harvester. "Nothing!"

"David, it is not like you to evade. What happened?"

"Nothing! On my word! I merely saw a vision and dreamed a dream."

"You! A rank materialist! Saw a vision and dreamed a dream! And you
call it nothing. Worst thing that could happen! Whenever a man of
common-sense goes to seeing things that don't exist, and dreaming
dreams, why look out! What did you see? What did you dream?"

"You woman!" laughed the Harvester. "Talk about curiosity! I'd have to
be a poet to describe my vision, and the dream was strictly private.
I couldn't tell it, not for any price you could mention. Go to your
operation."

The doctor paused on the threshold.

"You can't fool me," he said. "I can diagnose you all right. You are
poet enough, but the vision was sacred; and when a man won't tell, it's
always and forever a woman. I know all now I ever will, because I know
you, David. A man with a loose mouth and a low mind drags the women of
his acquaintance through whatever mire he sinks in; but you couldn't
tell, David, not even about a dream woman. Come again soon! You are
my elixir of life, lad! I revel in the atmosphere you bring. Wish me
success now, I am going to a difficult, delicate operation."

"I do!" cried the Harvester heartily. "I do! But you can't fail. You
never have and that proves you cannot! Good-bye!"

Down the street went the Harvester, passing over city pave with his
free, swinging stride, his head high, his face flushed with vivid
outdoor tints, going somewhere to do something worth while, the
impression always left behind him. Men envied his robust appearance and
women looked twice, always twice, and sometimes oftener if there was any
opportunity; but twice at least was the rule. He left a little roll of
bills at the bank and started toward the library. When he entered the
reading room an attendant with an eager smile hastily came toward him.

"What will you have this morning, Mr. Langston?" she asked in the voice
of one who would render willing service.

"Not the big books to-day," laughed the Harvester. "I've only a short
time. I'll glance through the magazines."

He selected several from a table and going to a corner settled with them
and for two hours was deeply engrossed. He took an envelope from his
pocket, traced lines, and read intently. He studied the placing of
rooms, the construction of furniture, and all attractive ideas were
noted. When at last he arose the attendant went to replace the magazines
on the table. They had been opened widely, and as she turned the
leaves they naturally fell apart at the plans for houses or articles of
furniture.

The Harvester slowly went down the street. Before every furniture store
he paused and studied the designs displayed in the windows. Then he
untied Betsy and drove to a lumber mill on the outskirts of the city and
made arrangements to have some freshly felled logs of black walnut
and curly maple sawed into different sizes and put through a course in
drying.

He drove back to Medicine Woods whistling, singing, and talking to
Belshazzar beside him. He ate a hasty lunch and at three o'clock was in
the forest, blazing and felling slender, straight-trunked oak and ash of
the desired proportions.



CHAPTER III. HARVESTING THE FOREST


The forest is never so wonderful as when spring wrestles with winter for
supremacy. While the earth is yet ice bound, while snows occasionally
fly, spring breathes her warmer breath of approach, and all nature
responds. Sunny knolls, embankments, and cleared spaces become bare,
while shadow spots and sheltered nooks remain white. This perfumes the
icy air with a warmer breath of melting snow. The sap rises in the trees
and bushes, sets buds swelling, and they distil a faint, intangible
odour. Deep layers of dead leaves cover the frozen earth, and the sun
shining on them raises a steamy vapour unlike anything else in nature. A
different scent rises from earth where the sun strikes it. Lichen faces
take on the brightest colours they ever wear, and rough, coarse mosses
emerge in rank growth from their cover of snow and add another perfume
to mellowing air. This combination has breathed a strange intoxication
into the breast of mankind in all ages, and bird and animal life prove
by their actions that it makes the same appeal to them.

Crows caw supremacy from tall trees; flickers, drunk on the wine of
nature, flash their yellow-lined wings and red crowns among trees in a
search for suitable building places; nut-hatches run head foremost down
rough trunks, spying out larvae and early emerging insects; titmice
chatter; the bold, clear whistle of the cardinal sounds never so gaily;
and song sparrows pipe from every wayside shrub and fence post. <DW53>s
and opossums stir in their dens, musk-rat and ground-hog inspect the
weather, while squirrels race along branches and bound from tree to tree
like winged folk.

All of them could have outlined the holdings of the Harvester almost
as well as any surveyor. They understood where the bang of guns and the
snap of traps menaced life. Best of all, they knew where cracked nuts,
handfuls of wheat, oats, and crumbs were scattered on the ground, and
where suet bones dangled from bushes. Here, too, the last sheaf from the
small wheat field at the foot of the hill was stoutly fixed on a high
pole, so that the grain was free to all feathered visitors.

When the Harvester hitched Betsy, loaded his spiles and sap buckets
into the wagon, and started to the woods to gather the offering the wet
maples were pouring down their swelling sides, almost his entire family
came to see him. They knew who fed and passed every day among them, and
so were unafraid.

After the familiarity of a long, cold winter, when it had been easier
to pick up scattered food than to search for it, they became so friendly
with the man, the dog, and the gray horse that they hastily snatched
the food offered at the barn and then followed through the woods. The
Harvester always was particular to wear large pockets, for it was good
company to have living creatures flocking after him, trusting to his
bounty. Ajax, a shimmering wonder of gorgeous feathers, sunned on the
ridge pole of the old log stable, preened, spread his train, and uttered
the peacock cry of defiance, to exercise his voice or to express his
emotions at all times. But at feeding hour he descended to the park and
snatched bites from the biggest turkey cocks and ganders and reigned in
power absolute over ducks, guineas, and chickens. Then he followed to
the barn and tried to frighten crows and jays, and the gentle white
doves under the eaves.

The Harvester walked through deep leaves and snow covering the road that
only a forester could have distinguished. Over his shoulder he carried
a mattock, and in the wagon were his clippers and an ax. Behind him came
Betsy drawing the sap buckets and big evaporating kettles. Through the
wood ranged Belshazzar, the craziest dog in all creation. He always went
wild at sap time. Here was none of the monotony of trapping for skins
around the lake. This marked the first full day in the woods for
the season. He ranged as he pleased and came for a pat or a look of
confidence when he grew lonely, while the Harvester worked.

At camp the man unhitched Betsy and tied her to the wagon and for
several hours distributed buckets. Then he hung the kettles and gathered
wood for the fire. At noon he returned to the cabin for lunch and
brought back a load of empty syrup cans, and barrels in which to collect
the sap. While the buckets filled at the dripping trees, he dug roots in
the sassafras thicket to fill orders and supply the demand of Onabasha
for tea. Several times he stopped to cut an especially fine tree.

"You know I hate to kill you," he apologized to the first one he felled.
"But it certainly must be legitimate for a man to take enough of his
trees to build a home. And no other house is possible for a creature of
the woods but a cabin, is there? The birds use of the material they find
here; surely I have the right to do the same. Seems as if nothing else
would serve, at least for me. I was born and reared here, I've always
loved you; of course, I can't use anything else for my home."

He swung the ax and the chips flew as he worked on a straight half-grown
oak. After a time he paused an instant and rested, and as he did so he
looked speculatively at his work.

"I wonder where she is to-day," he said. "I wonder what she is going to
think of a log cabin in the woods. Maybe she has been reared in the
city and is afraid of a forest. She may not like houses made of logs.
Possibly she won't want to marry a Medicine Man. She may dislike the
man, not to mention his occupation. She may think it coarse and common
to work out of doors with your hands, although I'd have to argue there
is a little brain in the combination. I must figure out all these
things. But there is one on the lady: She should have settled these
points before she became quite so familiar. I have that for a foundation
anyway, so I'll go on cutting wood, and the remainder will be up to her
when I find her. When I find her," repeated the Harvester slowly. "But I
am not going to locate her very soon monkeying around in these woods. I
should be out where people are, looking for her right now."

He chopped steadily until the tree crashed over, and then, noticing a
rapidly filling bucket, he struck the ax in the wood and began gathering
sap. When he had made the round, he drove to the camp, filled the
kettles, and lighted the fire. While it started he cut and scraped
sassafras roots, and made clippings of tag alder, spice brush and white
willow into big bundles that were ready to have the bark removed during
the night watch, and then cured in the dry-house.

He went home at evening to feed the poultry and replenish the
ever-burning fire of the engine and to keep the cabin warm enough that
food would not freeze. With an oilcloth and blankets he returned to camp
and throughout the night tended the buckets and boiling sap, and worked
or dozed by the fire between times. Toward the end of boiling, when the
sap was becoming thick, it had to be watched with especial care so it
would not scorch. But when the kettles were freshly filled the Harvester
sat beside them and carefully split tender twigs of willow and slipped
off the bark ready to be spread on the trays.

"You are a good tonic," he mused as he worked, "and you go into some of
the medicine for rheumatism. If she ever has it we will give her some
of you, and then she will be all right again. Strange that I should be
preparing medicinal bark by the sugar camp fire, but I have to make this
hay, not while the sun shines, but when the bark is loose, while the sap
is rising. Wonder who will use this. Depends largely on where I sell it.
Anyway, I hope it will take the pain out of some poor body. Prices so
low now, not worth gathering unless I can kill time on it while waiting
for something else. Never got over seven cents a pound for the best I
ever sold, and it takes a heap of these little quills to make a pound
when they are dry. That's all of you----about twenty-five cents' worth.
But even that is better than doing nothing while I wait, and some one
has to keep the doctors supplied with salicin and tannin, so, if I do,
other folks needn't bother."

He arose and poured more sap into the kettles as it boiled away and
replenished the fire. He nibbled a twig when he began on the spice
brush. As he sat on the piled wood, and bent over his work he was
an attractive figure. His face shone with health and was bright with
anticipation. While he split the tender bark and slipped out the wood he
spoke his thoughts slowly:

"The five cents a pound I'll get for you is even less, but I love the
fragrance and taste. You don't peel so easy as the willow, but I like
to prepare you better, because you will make some miserable little sick
child well or you may cool some one's fevered blood. If ever she has a
fever, I hope she will take medicine made from my bark, because it will
be strong and pure. I've half a notion to set some one else gathering
the stuff and tending the plants and spend my time in the little
laboratory compounding different combinations. I don't see what bigger
thing a man can do than to combine pure, clean, unadulterated roots and
barks into medicines that will cool fevers, stop chills, and purify bad
blood. The doctors may be all right, but what are they going to do if we
men behind the prescription cases don't supply them with unadulterated
drugs. Answer me that, Mr. Sapsucker. Doc says I've done mighty well so
far as I have gone. I can't think of a thing on earth I'd rather do, and
there's money no end in it. I could get too rich for comfort in short
order. I wouldn't be too wealthy to live just the way I do for any
consideration. I don't know about her, though. She is lovely, and
handsome women usually want beautiful clothing, and a quantity of things
that cost no end of money. I may need all I can get, for her. One never
can tell."

He arose to stir the sap and pour more from the barrels to the kettles
before he began on the tag alder he had gathered.

"If it is all the same to you, I'll just keep on chewing spice brush
while I work," he muttered. "You are entirely too much of an astringent
to suit my taste and you bring a cent less a pound. But you are thicker
and dry heavier, and you grow in any quantity around the lake and on the
marshy places, so I'll make the size of the bundle atone for the price.
If I peel you while I wait on the sap I'm that much ahead. I can spread
you on drying trays in a few seconds and there you are. Howl your head
off, Bel, I don't care what you have found. I wouldn't shoot anything
to-day, unless the cupboard was bare and I was starvation hungry. In
that case I think a man comes first, and I'd kill a squirrel or quail
in season, but blest if I'd butcher a lot or do it often. Vegetables
and bread are better anyway. You peel easier even than the willow. What
jolly whistles father used to make!

"There was about twenty cents' worth of spice, and I'll easy raise it to
a dollar on this. I'll get a hundred gallons of syrup in the coming two
weeks and it will bring one fifty if I boil and strain it carefully and
can guarantee it contains no hickory bark and brown sugar. And it won't!
Straight for me or not at all. Pure is the word at Medicine Woods; syrup
or drugs it's the same thing. Between times I can fell every tree I'll
need for the new cabin, and average a dollar a day besides on spice,
alder, and willow, and twice that for sassafras for the Onabasha
markets; not to mention the quantities I can dry this year. Aside from
spring tea, they seem to use it for everything. I never yet have had
enough. It goes into half the tonics, anodyne, and stimulants; also soap
and candy. I see where I grow rich in spite of myself, and also where my
harvest is going to spoil before I can garner it, if I don't step
lively and double even more than I am now. Where the cabin is to come
in----well it must come if everything else goes.

"The roots can wait and I'll dig them next year and get more and larger
pieces. I won't really lose anything, and if she should come before I
am ready to start to find her, why then I'll have her home prepared.
How long before you begin your house, old fire-fly?" he inquired of a
flaming cardinal tilting on a twig.

He arose to make the round of the sap buckets again, then resumed his
work peeling bark, and so the time passed. In the following ten days he
collected and boiled enough sap to make more syrup than he had expected.
His earliest spring store of medicinal twigs, that were peeled to dry in
quills, were all collected and on the trays; he had digged several wagon
loads of sassafras and felled all the logs of stout, slender oak he
would require for his walls. Choice timber he had been curing for
candlestick material he hauled to the saw-mills to have cut properly,
for the thought of trying his hand at tables and chairs had taken
possession of him. He was sure he could make furniture that would appear
quite as well as the mission pieces he admired on display in the store
windows of the city. To him, chairs and tables made from trees that grew
on land that had belonged for three generations to his ancestors, trees
among which he had grown, played, and worked, trees that were so much
his friends that he carefully explained the situation to them before
using an ax or saw, trees that he had cut, cured, and fashioned into
designs of his own, would make vastly more valuable furnishings in his
home than anything that could be purchased in the city.

As he drove back and forth he watched constantly for her. He was working
so desperately, planning far ahead, doubling and trebling tasks, trying
to do everything his profession demanded in season, and to prepare
timber and make plans for the new cabin, as well as to start a pair
of candlesticks of marvellous design for her, that night was one
long, unbroken sleep of the thoroughly tired man, but day had become a
delightful dream.

He fed the chickens to produce eggs for her. He gathered barks and
sluiced roots on the raft in the lake, for her. He grubbed the spice
thicket before the door and moved it into the woods to make space for a
lawn, for her. His eyes were wide open for every woven case and dangling
cocoon of the big night moths that propagated around him, for her. Every
night when he left the woods from one to a dozen cocoons, that he had
detected with remarkable ease while the trees were bare, were stuck
in his hat band. As he arranged them in a cool, dry place he talked to
them.

"Of course I know you are valuable and there are collectors who would
pay well for you, but I think not. You are the prettiest thing God made
that I ever saw, and those of you that home with me have no price on
your wings. You are much safer here than among the crows and jays of the
woods. I am gathering you to protect you, and to show to her. If I don't
find her by June, you may go scot free. All I want is the best pattern
I can get from some of you for candlestick designs. Of everything in the
whole world a candlestick should be made of wood. It should be carved
by hand, and of all ornamentations on earth the moth that flies to the
night light is the most appropriate. Owls are not so bad. They are of
the night, and they fly to light, too, but they are so old. Nobody I
ever have known used a moth. They missed the best when they neglected
them. I'll make her sticks over an original pattern; I'll twine
nightshade vines, with flowers and berries around them, and put a
trailed luna on one, and what is the next prettiest for the other? I'll
think well before if decide. Maybe she'll come by the time I get to
carving and tell me what she likes. That would beat my taste or guessing
a mile."

He carefully arranged the twigs bearing cocoons in a big, wire-covered
box to protect them from the depredations of nibbling mice and the
bolder attacks of the saucy ground squirrels that stored nuts in his
loft and took possession of the attic until their scampering sometimes
awoke him in the night.

Every trip he made to the city he stopped at the library to examine
plans of buildings and furniture and to make notes. The oak he had
hauled was being hewed into shape by a neighbour who knew how, and every
wagon that carried a log to the city to be dressed at the mill brought
back timber for side walls, joists, and rafters. Night after night he
sat late poring over his plans for the new rooms, above all for her
chamber. With poised pencil he wavered over where to put the closet and
entrance to her bath. He figured on how wide to make her bed and where
it should stand. He remembered her dressing table in placing windows
and a space for a chest of drawers. In fact there was nothing the active
mind of the Harvester did not busy itself with in those days that might
make a woman a comfortable home. Every thought emanated from impulses
evolved in his life in the woods, and each was executed with mighty
tenderness.

A killdeer sweeping the lake close two o'clock one morning awakened him.
He had planned to close the sugar camp for the season that day, but when
he heard the notes of the loved bird he wondered if that would not be a
good time to stake out the foundations and begin digging. There was yet
ice in the ground, but the hillside was rapidly thawing, and although
the work would be easier later, so eager was the Harvester to have walls
up and a roof over that he decided to commence.

But when morning came and he and Belshazzar breakfasted and fed Betsy
and the stock, he concluded to return to his first plan and close the
camp. All the sap collected that day went into the vinegar barrel. He
loaded the kettles, buckets, and spiles and stopped at the spice thicket
to cut a bale of twigs as he passed. He carried one load to the wagon
and returned for another. Down wind on swift wing came a bird and
entered the bushes. Motionless the Harvester peered at it. A mourning
dove had returned to him through snow, skifting over cold earth. It
settled on a limb and began dressing its plumage. At that instant a
wavering, "Coo coo a'gh coo," broke in sobbing notes from the deep wood.
Without paying the slightest heed, the dove finished a wing, ruffled
and settled her feathers, and opened her bill in a human-like yawn. The
Harvester smiled. The notes swelled closer in renewed pleading. The cry
was beyond doubt a courting male and this an indifferent female.
Her beady eyes snapped, her head turned coquettishly, a picture of
self-possession, she hid among the dense twigs of the spice thicket.
Around the outside circled the pleading male.

With shining eyes the Harvester watched. These were of the things
that made life in the woods most worth while. More insistent grew the
wavering notes of the lover. More indifferent became the beloved. She
was superb in her poise as she amused herself in hiding. A perfect burst
of confused, sobbing notes broke on the air. Then away in the deep wood
a softly-wavering, half-questioning "Coo-ah!" answered them. Amazement
flashed into the eyes of the Harvester, but his face was not nearly so
expressive as that of the bird. She lifted a bewildered head and grew
rigid in an attitude of tense listening. There was a pause. In quicker
measure and crowding notes the male called again. Instantly the soft
"Coo!" wavered in answer. The surprised little hen bird of the thicket
hopped straight up and settled on her perch again, her dark eyes
indignant as she uttered a short "Coo!" The muscles of the Harvester's
chest were beginning to twitch and quiver. More intense grew the notes
of the pleading male. Softly seductive came the reply. The clapping
of his wings could be heard as he flew in search of the charmer. "A'gh
coo!" cried the deserted female as she tilted off the branch and tore
through the thicket in pursuit, with wings hastened by fright at the
ringing laugh of the Harvester.

"Not so indifferent after all, Bel," he said to the dog standing in
stiff point beside him. "That was all 'pretend!' But she waited just a
trifle too long. Now she will have to fight it out with a rival. Good
thing if some of the flirtatious women could have seen that. Help them
to learn their own minds sooner."

He laughed as he heaped the twigs on top of the wagon and started down
the hill chuckling. Belshazzar followed, leading Betsy straight in the
middle of the road by the hitching strap. A few yards ahead the man
stopped suddenly with lifted hand. The dog and horse stood motionless.
A dove flashed across the road and settled in sight on a limb. Almost
simultaneously another perched beside it, and they locked bills in a
long caress, utterly heedless of a plaintive "Coo" in the deep wood.

"Settled!" said the Harvester. "Jupiter! I wish my troubles were that
nearly finished! Wish I knew where she is and how to find my way to her
lips! Wonder if she will come when I call her. What if I should
find her, and she would have everything on earth, other lovers, and
indifference worse than Madam Dove's for me. Talk about bitterness! Well
I'd have the dream left anyway. And there are always two sides. There is
just a possibility that she may be poor and overworked, sick and tired,
and wondering why I don't come. Possibly she had a dream, too, and she
wishes I would hurry. Dear Lord!"

The Harvester began to perspire as he strode down the hill. He scarcely
waited to hang the harness properly. He did not stop to unload the wagon
until night, but went after an ax and a board that he split into pegs.
Then he took a ball of twine, a measuring line, and began laying out his
foundation, when the hard earth would scarcely hold the stakes he drove
into it. When he found he only would waste time in digging he put away
the neatly washed kettles, peeled the spice brush, spread it to dry, and
prepared his dinner. After that he began hauling stone and cement for
his basement floor and foundation walls. Occasionally he helped at
hewing logs when the old man paused to rest. That afternoon the first
robin of the season hailed him in passing.

"Hello!" cried the Harvester. "You don't mean to tell me that you have
beaten the larks! You really have! Well since I see it, I must believe,
but you are early. Come around to the back door if crumbs or wheat will
do or if you can make out on suet and meat bones! We are good and ready
for you. Where is your mate? For any sake, don't tell me you don't know.
One case of that kind at Medicine Woods is enough. Say you came ahead
to see if it is too cold or to select a home and get ready for her. Say
anything on earth except that you love her, and want her until your body
is one quivering ache, and you don't know where she is."



CHAPTER IV. A COMMISSION FOR THE SOUTH WIND

The next morning the larks trailed ecstasy all over the valley, the
following day cuckoos were calling in the thickets, a warm wind swept
from the south and set swollen buds bursting, while the sun shone,
causing the Harvester to rejoice. Betsy's white coat was splashed with
the mud of the valley road; the feet of Belshazzar left tracks over
lumber piles; and the Harvester removed his muck-covered shoes at the
door and wore slippers inside. The skunk cabbage appeared around the
edge of the forest, rank mullein and thistles lay over the fields in
big circles of green, and even plants of delicate growth were thrusting
their heads through mellowing earth and dead leaves, to reach light and
air.

Then the Harvester took his mattock and began to dig. His level best
fell so far short of what he felt capable of doing and desired to
accomplish that the following day he put two more men on the job. Then
the earth did fly, and so soon as the required space was excavated the
walls were lined with stone and a smooth basement floor was made of
cement. The night the new home stood, a skeleton of joists and rafters,
gleaming whitely on the banks of Loon Lake, the Harvester went to the
bridge crossing Singing Water and slowly came up the driveway to see how
the work appeared. He caught his breath as he advanced. He had intended
to stake out generous rooms, but this, compared with the cabin, seemed
like a big hotel.

"I hope I haven't made it so large it will be a burden," he
soliloquized. "It's huge! But while I am at it I want to build big
enough, and I think I have."

He stood on the driveway, his arms folded, and looked at the structure
as he occasionally voiced his thoughts.

"The next thing is to lay up the side walls and get the roof over. Got
to have plenty of help, for those logs are hewed to fourteen inches
square and some of them are forty feet long. That's timber! Grew with
me, too. Personally acquainted with almost every tree of it. We will bed
them in cement, use care with the roof, and if that doesn't make a cool
house in the summer, and a warm one in winter, I'll be disappointed.
It sets among the trees, and on the hillside just right. We must have a
wide porch, plenty of flowers, vines, ferns, and mosses, and when I get
everything finished and she sees it----perhaps it will please her."

A great horned owl swept down the hill, crossed the lake, and hooted
from the forest of the opposite bank. The Harvester thought of his dream
and turned.

"Any women walking the water to-night? Come if you like," he bantered,
"I don't mind in the least. In fact, I'd rather enjoy it. I'd be so
happy if you would come now and tell me how this appears to you,
for it's all yours. I'd have enlarged the store-room, dry-houses and
laboratory for myself, but this cabin, never! The old one suited me as
it was; but for you----I should have a better home."

The Harvester glanced from the shining skeleton to the bridge of gold
and back again.

"Where are you to-night?" he questioned. "What are you doing? Can't you
give me a hint of where to search for you when this is ready? I don't
know but I am beginning wrong. My little brothers of the wood do
differently. They announce their intentions the first thing, flaunt
their attractions, and display their strength. They say aloud, for all
the listening world to hear, what is in their hearts. They chip, chirp,
and sing, warble, whistle, thrill, scream, and hoot it. They are strong
on self-expression, and appreciative of their appearance. They meet,
court, mate, and THEN build their home together after a mutual plan.
It's a good way, too! Lots surer of getting things satisfactory."

The Harvester sat on a lumber pile and gazed questioningly at the
framework.

"I wish I knew if I am going at things right," he said. "There are two
sides to consider. If she is in a good home, and lovingly cared for, it
would be proper to court her and get her promise, if I could----no I'm
blest if I'll be so modest----get her promise, as I said, and let her
wait while I build the cabin. But if she should be poor, tired, and
neglected, then I ought to have this ready when I find her, so I could
pick her up and bring her to it, with no more ceremony than the birds."

The Harvester's clear skin flushed crimson.

"Of course, I don't mean no wedding ceremony," he amended. "I was
thinking of a long time wasted in preliminaries when in my soul I know I
am going to marry my Dream Girl before I ever have seen her in reality.
What would be the use in spending much time in courting? She is my wife
now, by every law of God. Let me get a glimpse of her, and I'll prove
it. But I've got to make tracks, for if she were here, where would I put
her? I must hurry!"

He went to the work room and began polishing a table top. He had bought
a chest of tools and was spending every spare minute on tables,
chair seats, and legs. He had decided to make these first and carve
candlesticks later when he had more time. Two hours he worked at the
furniture, and then went to bed. The following morning he put eggs under
several hens that wanted to set, trimmed his grape-vines, examined the
precious ginseng beds, attended his stock, got breakfast for Belshazzar
and himself, and was ready for work when the first carpenter arrived.
Laying hewed logs went speedily, and before the Harvester believed it
possible the big shingles he had ordered were being nailed on the roof.
Then came the plumber and arranged for the bathroom, and the furnace
man placed the heating pipes. The Harvester had intended the cabin to
be mostly the work of his own hands, but when he saw how rapidly
skilled carpenters worked, he changed his mind and had them finish the
living-room, his room, and the upstairs, and make over the dining-room
and kitchen.

Her room he worked on alone, with a little help if he did not know how
to join the different parts. Every thing was plain and simple, after
plans of his own, but the Harvester laid floors and made window casings,
seats, and doors of wood that the big factories of Grand Rapids used in
veneering their finest furniture. When one of his carpenters pointed
out this to him, and suggested that he sell his lumber to McLean and use
pine flooring from the mills the Harvester laughed at him.

"I don't say that I could afford to buy burl maple, walnut, and cherry
for wood-work," said the Harvester. "I could not, but since I have it,
you can stake your life I won't sell it and build my home of cheap,
rapidly decaying wood. The best I have goes into this cabin and what
remains will do to sell. I have an idea that when this is done it is
going to appear first rate. Anyway, it will be solid enough to last
a thousand years, and with every day of use natural wood grows more
beautiful. When we get some tables, couches, and chairs made from the
same timber as the casings and the floors, I think it will be fine.
I want money, but I don't want it bad enough to part with the BEST of
anything I have for it. Go carefully and neatly there; it will have to
be changed if you don't."

So the work progressed rapidly. When the carpenters had finished the
last stroke on the big veranda they remained a day more and made flower
boxes, and a swinging couch, and then the greedy Harvester kept the best
man with him a week longer to help on the furniture.

"Ain't you going to say a word about her, Langston?" asked this man as
they put a mirror-like surface on a curly maple dressing table top.

"Her!" ejaculated the Harvester. "What do you mean?"

"I haven't seen you bathe anywhere except in the lake since I have been
here," said the carpenter. "Do you want me to think that a porcelain
tub, this big closet, and chest of drawers are for you?"

A wave of crimson swept over the Harvester.

"No, they are not for me," he said simply. "I don't want to be any more
different from other men than I can help, although I know that life in
the woods, the rigid training of my mother, and the reading of only the
books that would aid in my work have made me individual in many of my
thoughts and ways. I suppose most men, just now, would tell you anything
you want to know. There is only one thing I can say: The best of my soul
and brain, the best of my woods and store-house, the best I can buy with
money is not good enough for her. That's all. For myself, I am getting
ready to marry, of course. I think all normal men do and that it is a
matter of plain common-sense that they should. Life with the right woman
must be infinitely broader and better than alone. Are you married?"

"Yes. Got a wife and four children."

"Are you sorry?"

"Sorry!" the carpenter shrilled the word. "Sorry! Well that's the best
I ever heard! Am I sorry I married Nell and got the kids? Do I look
sorry?"

"I am not expecting to be, either," said the Harvester calmly. "I think
I have done fairly well to stick to my work and live alone until I am
twenty-six. I have thought the thing all over and made up my mind. As
soon as I get this house far enough along that I feel I can proceed
alone I am going to rush the marrying business just as fast as I can,
and let her finish the remainder to her liking."

"Well this ought to please her."

"That's because you find your own work good," laughed the Harvester.

"Not altogether!" The carpenter polished the board and stood it on end
to examine the surface as he talked. "Not altogether! Nothing but good
work would suit you. I was thinking of the little creek splashing down
the hill to the lake; and that old log hewer said that in a few more
days things here would be a blaze of colour until fall."

"Almost all the drug plants and bushes leaf beautifully and flower
brilliantly," explained the Harvester. "I studied the location suitable
to each variety before I set the beds and planned how to grow plants
for continuity of bloom, and as much harmony of colour as possible.
Of course a landscape gardener would tear up some of it, but seen as a
whole it isn't so bad. Did you ever notice that in the open, with God's
blue overhead and His green for a background, He can place purple and
yellow, pink, magenta, red, and blue in masses or any combination you
can mention and the brighter the colour the more you like it? You
don't seem to see or feel that any grouping clashes; you revel in each
wonderful growth, and luxuriate in the brilliancy of the whole. Anyway,
this suits me."

"I guess it will please her, too," said the carpenter. "After all the
pains you've taken, she is a good one if it doesn't."

"I'll always have the consolation of having done my best," replied
the Harvester. "One can't do more! Whether she likes it or not depends
greatly on the way she has been reared."

"You talk as if you didn't know," commented the carpenter.

"You go on with this now," said the Harvester hastily. "I've got to
uncover some beds and dig my year's supply of skunk cabbage, else folk
with asthma and dropsy who depend on me will be short on relief. I ought
to take my sweet flag, too, but I'm so hurried now I think I'll leave it
until fall; I do when I can, because the bloom is so pretty around the
lake and the bees simply go wild over the pollen. Sometimes I almost
think I can detect it in their honey. Do you know I've wondered often
if the honey my bees make has medicinal properties and should be kept
separate in different seasons. In early spring when the plants and
bushes that furnish the roots and barks of most of the tonics are in
bloom, and the bees gather the pollen, that honey should partake in a
degree of the same properties and be good medicine. In the summer
it should aid digestion, and in the fall cure rheumatism and blood
disorders."

"Say you try it!" urged the carpenter. "I want a lot of the fall kind.
I'm always full of rheumatism by October. Exposure, no doubt."

"Over eating of too much rich food, you mean," laughed the Harvester.
"I'd like to see any man expose his body to more differing extremes of
weather than I do, and I'm never sick. It's because I am my own cook
and so I live mostly on fruits, vegetables, bread, milk, and eggs, a few
fish from the lake, a little game once in a great while or a chicken,
and no hot drinks; plenty of fresh water, air, and continuous work out
of doors. That's the prescription! I'd be ashamed to have rheumatism at
your age. There's food in the cupboard if you grow hungry. I am going
past one of the neighbours on my way to see about some work I want her
to do."

The Harvester stopped for lunch, carried food to Belshazzar, and started
straight across country, his mattock, with a bag rolled around the
handle, on his shoulder. His feet sank in the damp earth at the foot of
the hill, and he laughed as he leaped across Singing Water.

"You noisy chatterbox!" cried the man. "The impetus of coming down the
curves of the hill keeps you talking all the way across this muck bed to
the lake. With small work I can make you a thing of beauty. A few bushes
grubbed, a little deepening where you spread too much, and some more
mallows along the banks will do the trick. I must attend to you soon."

"Now what does the boy want?" laughed a white-haired old woman, as the
Harvester entered the door. "Mebby you think I don't know what you're
up to! I even can hear the hammering and the voices of the men when the
wind is in the south. I've been wondering how soon you'd need me. Out
with it!"

"I want you to get a woman and come over and spend a day with me.
I'll come after you and bring you back. I want you to go over mother's
bedding and have what needs it washed. All I want you to do is to
superintend, and tell me now what I will want from town for your work."

"I put away all your mother's bedding that you were not using, clean as
a ribbon."

"But it has been packed in moth preventives ever since and out only four
times a year to air, as you told me. It must smell musty and be yellow.
I want it fresh and clean."

"So what I been hearing is true, David?"

"Quite true!" said the Harvester.

"Whose girl is she, and when are you going to jine hands?"

The Harvester lifted his clear eyes and hesitated.

"Doc Carey laid you in my arms when you was born, David. I tended you
'fore ever your ma did. All your life you've been my boy, and I love you
same as my own blood; it won't go no farther if you say so. I'll never
tell a living soul. But I'm old and 'til better weather comes, house
bound; and I get mighty lonely. I'd like to think about you and her, and
plan for you, and love her as I always did you folks. Who is she, David?
Do I know the family?"

"No. She is a stranger to these parts," said the unhappy Harvester.

"David, is she a nice girl 'at your ma would have liked?"

"She's the only girl in the world that I'd marry," said the Harvester
promptly, glad of a question he could answer heartily. "Yes. She is
gentle, very tender and----and affectionate," he went on so rapidly that
Granny Moreland could not say a word, "and as soon as I bring her home
you shall come to spend a day and get acquainted. I know you will love
her! I'll come in the morning, then. I must hurry now. I am working
double this spring and I'm off for the skunk cabbage bed to-day."

"You are working fit to kill, the neighbours say. Slavin' like a horse
all day, and half the night I see your lights burning."

"Do I appear killed?" laughingly inquired the Harvester.

"You look peart as a struttin' turkey gobbler," said the old woman. "Go
on with your work! Work don't hurt a-body. Eat a-plenty, sleep all you
ort, and you CAN'T work enough to hurt you."

"So the neighbours say I'm working now? New story, isn't it? Usually I'm
too lazy to make a living, if I remember."

"Only to those who don't sense your purceedings, David. I always knowed
how you grubbed and slaved an' set over them fearful books o' yours."

"More interesting than the wildest fiction," said the man. "I'm making
some medicine for your rheumatism, Granny. It is not fully tested yet,
but you get ready for it by cutting out all the salt you can. I haven't
time to explain this morning, but you remember what I say, leave out the
salt, and when Doc thinks it's safe I'll bring you something that will
make a new woman of you."

He went swinging down the road, and Granny Moreland looked after him.

"While he was talkin'," she muttered, "I felt full of information as a
flock o' almanacs, but now since he's gone, 'pears to me I don't know a
thing more 'an I did to start on."

"Close call," the Harvester was thinking. "Why the nation did I admit
anything to her? People may talk as they please, so long as I don't
sanction it, but I have two or three times. That's a fool trick. Suppose
I can't find her? Maybe she won't look at me if I can. Then I'd have
started something I couldn't finish. And if anybody thinks I'll end
this by taking any girl I can get, if I can't find Her, why they think
wrongly. Just the girl of my golden dream or no woman at all for me.
I've lived alone long enough to know how to do it in comfort. If I can't
find and win her I have no intention of starting a boarding house."

The Harvester began to laugh. "'I'd rather keep bachelor's hall in Hell
than go to board in Heaven!'" he quoted gaily. "That's my sentiment too.
If you can't have what you want, don't have anything. But there is no
use to become discouraged before I start. I haven't begun to hunt her
yet. Until I do, I might as well believe that she will walk across the
bridge and take possession just as soon as I get the last chair leg
polished. She might! She came in the dream, and to come actually
couldn't be any more real. I'll make a stiff hunt of it before I give
up, if I ever do. I never yet have made a complete failure of anything.
But just now I am hunting skunk cabbage. It's precisely the time to take
it."

Across the lake, in the swampy woods, close where the screech owl sang
and the girl of the golden dream walked in the moonlight the Harvester
began operations. He unrolled the sack, went to one end of the bed and
systematically started a swath across it, lifting every other plant
by the roots. Flowering time was almost past, but the bees knew where
pollen ripened, and hummed incessantly over and inside the queer
cone-shaped growths with their hooked beaks. It almost appeared as if
the sound made inside might be to give outsiders warning not to poach
on occupied territory, for the Harvester noticed that no bee entered a
pre-empted plant.

With skilful hand each stroke brought up a root and he tossed it to one
side. The plants were vastly peculiar things. First they seemed to be a
curled leaf with no flower. In colour they shaded from yellow to almost
black mahogany, and appeared as if they were a flower with no leaf.
Closer examination proved there was a stout leaf with a heavy outside
mid-rib, the tip of which curled over in a beak effect, that wrapped
around a peculiar flower of very disagreeable odour. The handling of
these plants by the hundred so intensified this smell the Harvester
shook his head.

"I presume you are mostly mine," he said to the busy little workers
around him. "If there is anything in my theory of honey having varying
medicinal properties at different seasons, right now mine should be
good for Granny's rheumatism and for nervous and dropsical people. I
shouldn't think honey flavoured with skunk cabbage would be fit to eat.
But, of course, it isn't all this. There is catkin pollen on the wind,
hazel and sassafras are both in bloom now, and so are several of the
earliest little flowers of the woods. You can gather enough of them
combined to temper the disagreeable odour into a racy sweetness, and all
the shrub blooms are good tonics, too, and some of the earthy ones. I'm
going to try giving some of you empty cases next spring and analyzing
the honey to learn if it isn't good medicine."

The Harvester straightened and leaned on the mattock to fill his lungs
with fresh air and as he delightedly sniffed it he commented, "Nothing
else has much of a chance since I've stirred up the cabbage bed. I can
scent the catkins plainly, being so close, and as I came here I could
detect the hazel and sassafras all right."

Above him a peculiar, raucous chattering for an instant hushed other
wood voices. The Harvester looked up, laughing gaily.

"So you've decided to announce it to your tribe at last, have you?"
he inquired. "You are waking the sleepers in their dens to-day? Well,
there's nothing like waiting until you have a sure thing. The bluebirds
broke the trail for the feathered folk the twenty-fourth of February.
The sap oozed from the maples about the same time for the trees. The
very first skunk cabbage was up quite a month ago to signal other plants
to come on, and now you are rousing the furred folk. I'll write this
down in my records----'When the earliest bluebird sings, when the sap
wets the maples, when the skunk cabbage flowers, and the first striped
squirrel barks, why then, it is spring!'"

He bent to his task and as he worked closer the water he noticed
sweet-flag leaves waving two inches tall beneath the surface.

"Great day!" he cried. "There you are making signs, too! And right! Of
course! Nature is always right. Just two inches high and it's harvest
for you. I can use a rake, and dried in the evaporator you bring me
ten cents a pound; to the folks needing a tonic you are worth a small
fortune. No doubt you cost that by the time you reach them; but I fear
I can't gather you just now. My head is a little preoccupied these days.
What with the cabbage, and now you, and many of the bushes and trees
making signs, with a new cabin to build and furnish, with a girl to find
and win, I'm what you might call busy. I've covered my book shelf.
I positively don't dare look Emerson or Maeterlinck in the face. One
consolation! I've got the best of Thoreau in my head, and if I read
Stickeen a few times more I'll be able to recite that. There's a man for
you, not to mention the dog! Bel, where are you? Would you stick to me
like that? I think you would. But you are a big, strong fellow. Stickeen
was only such a mite of a dog. But what a man he followed! I feel as
if I should put on high-heeled slippers and carry a fan and a lace
handkerchief when I think of him. And yet, most men wouldn't consider my
job so easy!"

The Harvester rapidly pitched the evil-smelling plants into big heaps
and as he worked he imitated the sounds around him as closely as he
could. The song sparrow laughed at him and flew away in disgust when he
tried its notes. The jay took time to consider, but was not fooled. The
nut-hatch ran head first down trees, larvae hunting, and was never a
mite deceived. But the killdeer on invisible legs, circling the lake
shore, replied instantly; so did the lark soaring above, and the dove of
the elm thicket close beside. The glittering black birds flashing over
every tree top answered the "T'check, t'chee!" of the Harvester quite as
readily as their mates.

The last time he paused to rest he had studied scents. When he
straightened again he was occupied with every voice of earth and air
around and above him, and the notes of singing hens, exultant cocks, the
scream of geese, the quack of ducks, the rasping crescendo of guineas
running wild in the woods, the imperial note of Ajax sunning on the
ridge pole and echoes from all of them on adjoining and distant farms.

"'Now I see the full meaning and beauty of that word sound!'" quoted
the Harvester. "'I thank God for sound. It always mounts and makes me
mount!'"

He breathed deeply and stood listening, a superb figure of a man, his
lean face glowing with emotion.

"If she could see and hear this, she would come," he said softly. "She
would come and she would love it as I do. Any one who understands,
and knows how to translate, cares for this above all else earth has to
offer. They who do not, fail to read as they run!"

He shifted feet mired in swamp muck, and stood as if loath to bend again
to his task. He lifted a weighted mattock and scraped the earth from
it, sniffing it delightedly the while. A soft south wind freighted with
aromatic odours swept his warm face. The Harvester removed his hat and
shook his head that the breeze might thread his thick hair.

"I've a commission for you, South Wind," he said whimsically. "Go find
my Dream Girl. Go carry her this message from me. Freight your breath
with spicy pollen, sun warmth, and flower nectar. Fill all her senses
with delight, and then, close to her ear, whisper it softly, 'Your lover
is coming!' Tell her that, O South Wind! Carry Araby to her nostrils,
Heaven to her ears, and then whisper and whisper it over and over until
you arouse the passion of earth in her blood. Tell her what is rioting
in my heart, and brain, and soul this morning. Repeat it until she must
awake to its meaning, 'Your lover is coming.'"



CHAPTER V. WHEN THE HARVESTER MADE GOOD

The sassafras and skunk cabbage were harvested. The last workman was
gone. There was not a sound at Medicine Woods save the babel of bird and
animal notes and the never-ending accompaniment of Singing Water. The
geese had gone over, some flocks pausing to rest and feed on Loon Lake,
and ducks that homed there were busy among the reeds and rushes. In
the deep woods the struggle to maintain and reproduce life was at its
height, and the courting songs of gaily  birds were drowned by
hawk screams and crow calls of defiance.

Every night before he plunged into the lake and went to sleep the
Harvester made out a list of the most pressing work that he would
undertake on the coming day. By systematizing and planning ahead he was
able to accomplish an unbelievable amount. The earliest rush of spring
drug gathering was over. He could be more deliberate in collecting the
barks he wanted. Flowers that were to be gathered at bloom time and
leaves were not yet ready. The heavy leaf coverings he had helped
the winds to heap on his beds of lily of the valley, bloodroot, and
sarsaparilla were removed carefully.

Inside the cabin the Harvester cleaned the glass, swept the floors with
a soft cloth pinned over the broom, and hung pale yellow blinds at the
windows. Every spare minute he worked on making furniture, and with each
piece he grew in experience and ventured on more difficult undertakings.
He had progressed so far that he now allowed himself an hour each day on
the candlesticks for her. Every evening he opened her door and with soft
cloths polished the furniture he had made. When her room was completed
and the dining-room partially finished, the Harvester took time to stain
the cabin and porch roofs the shade of the willow leaves, and on the
logs and pillars he used oil that served to intensify the light yellow
of the natural wood. With that much accomplished he felt better. If she
came now, in a few hours he would be able to offer a comfortable room,
enough conveniences to live until more could be provided, and of food
there was always plenty.

His daily programme was to feed and water his animals and poultry,
prepare breakfast for himself and Belshazzar, and go to the woods,
dry-house or store-room to do the work most needful in his harvesting.
In the afternoon he laboured over furniture and put finishing touches on
the new cabin, and after supper he carved and found time to read again,
as before his dream.

He was so happy he whistled and sang at his work much of the time at
first, but later there came days when doubts crept in and all his will
power was required to proceed steadily. As the cabin grew in better
shape for occupancy each day, more pressing became the thought of how he
was going to find and meet the girl of his dream. Sometimes it seemed to
him that the proper way was to remain at home and go on with his work,
trusting her to come to him. At such times he was happy and gaily
whistled and sang:

     "Stay in your chimney corner,
          Don't roam the world about,
       Stay in your chimney corner,
          And your own true love will find you out."


But there were other days while grubbing in the forest, battling with
roots in the muck and mire of the lake bank, staggering under a load
for two men, scarcely taking time to eat and sleep enough to keep his
condition perfect, when that plan seemed too hopeless and senseless to
contemplate. Then he would think of locking the cabin, leaving the drugs
to grow undisturbed by collecting, hiring a neighbour to care for his
living creatures, and starting a search over the world to find her.
There came times when the impulse to go was so strong that only the
desire to take a day more to decide where, kept him. Every time his mind
was made up to start the following day came the counter thought, what
if I should go and she should come in my absence? In the dream she came.
That alone held him, even in the face of the fact that if he left home
some one might know of and rifle the precious ginseng bed, carefully
tended these seven years for the culmination the coming fall would
bring. That ginseng was worth many thousands and he had laboured over
it, fighting worms and parasites, covering and uncovering it with the
changing seasons, a siege of loving labour.

Sometimes a few hours of misgiving tortured him, but as a rule he was
cheerful and happy in his preparations. Without intending to do it
he was gradually furnishing the cabin. Every few days saw a new piece
finished in the workshop. Each trip to Onabasha ended in the purchase of
some article he could see would harmonize with his colour plans for
one of the rooms. He had filled the flower boxes for the veranda with
delicate plants that were growing luxuriantly.

Then he designed and began setting a wild-flower garden outside her door
and started climbing vines over the logs and porches, but whatever he
planted he found in the woods or took from beds he cultivated. Many of
the medicinal vines had leaves, flowers, twining tendrils, and berries
or fruits of wonderful beauty. Every trip to the forest he brought back
a half dozen vines, plants, or bushes to set for her. All of them either
bore lovely flowers, berries, quaint seed pods, or nuts, and beside the
drive and before the cabin he used especial care to plant a hedge of
bittersweet vines, burning bush, and trees of mountain ash, so that
the glory of their colour would enliven the winter when days might be
gloomy.

He planted wild yam under her windows that its queer rattles might amuse
her, and hop trees where their castanets would play gay music with every
passing wind of fall. He started a thicket along the opposite bank of
Singing Water where it bubbled past her window, and in it he placed in
graduated rows every shrub and small tree bearing bright flower, berry,
or fruit. Those remaining he used as a border for the driveway from the
lake, so that from earliest spring her eyes would fall on a procession
of colour beginning with catkins and papaw lilies, and running through
alders, haws, wild crabs, dogwood, plums, and cherry intermingled with
forest saplings and vines bearing scarlet berries in fall and winter. In
the damp soil of the same character from which they were removed, in
the shade and under the skilful hand of the Harvester, few of these
knew they had been transplanted, and when May brought the catbirds and
orioles much of this growth was flowering quite as luxuriantly as the
same species in the woods.

The Harvester was in the store-house packing boxes for shipment. His
room was so small and orders so numerous that he could not keep large
quantities on hand. All crude stuff that he sent straight from the
drying-house was fresh and brightly . His stock always was
marked prime A-No. 1. There was a step behind him and the Harvester
turned. A boy held out a telegram. The man opened it to find an order
for some stuff to be shipped that day to a large laboratory in Toledo.

His hands deftly tied packages and he hastily packed bottles and nailed
boxes. Then he ran to harness Betsy and load. As he drove down the hill
to the bridge he looked at his watch and shook his head.

"What are you good for at a pinch, Betsy?" he asked as he flecked the
surprised mare's flank with a switch. Belshazzar cocked his ears and
gazed at the Harvester in astonishment.

"That wasn't enough to hurt her," explained the man. "She must speed up.
This is important business. The amount involved is not so much, but I do
love to make good. It's a part of my religion, Bel. And my religion has
so precious few parts that if I fail in the observance of any of them
it makes a big hole in my performances. Now we don't want to end a life
full of holes, so we must get there with this stuff, not because it's
worth the exertion in dollars and cents, but because these men patronize
us steadily and expect us to fill orders, even by telegraph. Hustle,
Betsy!"

The whip fell again and Belshazzar entered indignant protest.

"It isn't going to hurt her," said the Harvester impatiently. "She may
walk all the way back. She can rest while I get these boxes billed and
loaded if she can be persuaded to get them to the express office on
time. The trouble with Betsy is that she wants to meander along the road
with a loaded wagon as her mother and grandmother before her wandered
through the woods wearing a bell to attract the deer. Father used to say
that her mother was the smartest bell mare that ever entered the forest.
She'd not only find the deer, but she'd make friends with them and lead
them straight as a bee-line to where he was hiding. Betsy, you must
travel!"

The Harvester drew the lines taut, and the whip fell smartly. The
astonished Betsy snorted and pranced down the valley as fast as she
could, but every step indicated that she felt outraged and abused. This
was the loveliest day of the season. The sun was shining, the air was
heavy with the perfume of flowering shrubs and trees, the orchards of
the valley were white with bloom. Farmers were hurrying back and forth
across fields, leaving up turned lines of black, swampy mould behind
them, and one progressive individual rode a wheeled plow, drove three
horses and enjoyed the shelter of a canopy.

"Saints preserve us, Belshazzar!" cried the Harvester. "Do you see that?
He is one of the men who makes a business of calling me shiftless. Now
he thinks he is working. Working! For a full-grown man, did you ever see
the equal? If I were going that far I'd wear a tucked shirt, panama hat,
have a pianola attachment, and an automatic fan."

The Harvester laughed as he again touched Betsy and hurried to Onabasha.
He scarcely saw the delights offered on either hand, and where his
eyes customarily took in every sight, and his ears were tuned for
the faintest note of earth or tree top, to day he saw only Betsy and
listened for a whistle he dreaded to hear at the water tank. He climbed
the embankment of the railway at a slower pace, but made up time going
down hill to the city.

"I am not getting a blame thing out of this," he complained to
Belshazzar. "There are riches to stagger any scientist wasting to-day,
and all I've got to show is one oriole. I did hear his first note and
see his flash, and so unless we can take time to make up for this on the
home road we will have to christen it oriole day. It's a perfumed golden
day, too; I can get that in passing, but how I loathe hurrying. I don't
mind planning things and working steadily, but it's not consistent with
the dignity of a sane man to go rushing across country with as much
appreciation of the delights offered right now as a chicken with its
head off would have. We will loaf going back to pay for this! And won't
we invite our souls? We will stop and gather a big bouquet of crab
apple blossoms to fill the green pitcher for her. Maybe some of their
wonderful perfume will linger in her room. When the petals fall we will
scatter them in the drawers of her dresser, and they may distil a faint
flower odour there. We could do that to all her furniture, but perhaps
she doesn't like perfume. She'll be compelled to after she reaches
Medicine Woods. Betsy, you must travel faster!"

The whip fell again and the Harvester stopped at the depot with a few
minutes to spare. He threw the hitching strap to Belshazzar, and ran
into the express office with an arm load of boxes.

"Bill them!" he cried. "It's a rush order. I want it to go on the
next express. Almost due I think. I'll help you and we can book them
afterward."

The expressman ran for a truck and they hastily weighed and piled on
boxes. When the last one was loaded from the wagon, a heap more lying in
the office were added, pitched on indiscriminately as the train pulled
under the sheds of the Union Station.

"I'll push," cried the Harvester, "and help you get them on."

Hurrying as fast as he could the expressman drew the heavy truck through
the iron gates and started toward the train slowing to a stop, and the
Harvester pushed. As they came down the platform they passed the dining
and sleeping cars of the long train and were several times delayed
by descending passengers. Just opposite the day coach the expressman
narrowly missed running into several women leading small children and
stopped abruptly. A toppling box threatened the head of the Harvester.
He peered around the truck and saw they must wait a few seconds. He put
in the time watching the people. A gray-haired old man, travelling in a
silk hat, wavered on the top step and went his way. A fat woman loaded
with bundles puffed as she clung trembling a second in fear she would
miss the step she could not see. A tall, slender girl with a face coldly
white came next, and from the broken shoe she advanced, the bewildered
fright of big, dark eyes glancing helplessly, the Harvester saw that she
was poor, alone, ill, and in trouble. Pityingly he turned to watch her,
and as he gauged her height, saw her figure, and a dark coronet of hair
came into view, a ghastly pallor swept his face.

"Merciful God!" he breathed, "that's my Dream Girl!"

The truck started with a jerk. The toppling box fell, struck a passing
boy, and knocked him down. The mother screamed and the Harvester sprang
to pick up the child and see that he was not dangerously hurt. Then he
ran after the truck, pitched on the box, and whirling, sped beside the
train toward the gates of exit. There was the usual crush, but he could
see the tall figure passing up the steps to the depot. He tried to
force his way and was called a brute by a crowded woman. He ran down the
platform to the gates he had entered with the truck. They were automatic
and had locked. Then he became a primal creature being cheated of a
lawful mate and climbed the high iron fence and ran for the waiting
room.

He swept it at a glance, not forgetting the women's apartment and the
side entrance. Then he hurried to the front exit. Up the street leading
from the city there were few people and he could see no sign of the
slight, white-faced girl. He crossed the sidewalk and ran down the
gutter for a block and breathlessly waited the passing crowd on the
corner. She was not among it. He tried one more square. Still he could
not see her. Then he ran back to the depot. He thought surely he must
have missed her. He again searched the woman's and general waiting room
and then he thought of the conductor. From him it could be learned where
she entered the car. He ran for the station, bolted the gate while the
official called to him, and reached the track in time to see the train
pull out within a few yards of him.

"You blooming idiot!" cried the angry expressman as the Harvester ran
against him, "where did you go? Why didn't you help me? You are white as
a sheet! Have you lost your senses?"

"Worse!" groaned the Harvester. "Worse! I've lost what I prize most on
earth. How could I reach the conductor of that train?"

"Telegraph him at the next station. You can have an answer in a half
hour."

The Harvester ran to the office, and with shaking hand wrote this
message:

"Where did a tall girl with big black eyes and wearing a gray dress take
your train? Important."

Then he went out and minutely searched the depot and streets. He hired
an automobile to drive him over the business part of Onabasha for three
quarters of an hour. Up one street and down another he went slowly where
there were crowds, faster as he could, but never a sight of her. Then he
returned to the depot and found his message. It read, "Transferred to me
at Fort Wayne from Chicago."

"Chicago baggage!" he cried, and hurried to the check room. He had lost
almost an hour. When he reached the room he found the officials busy and
unwilling to be interrupted. Finally he learned there had been a half
dozen trunks from Chicago. All were taken save two, and one glance at
them told the Harvester that they did not belong to the girl in gray.
The others had been claimed by men having checks for them. If she had
been there, the officials had not noticed a tall girl having a white
face and dark eyes. When he could think of no further effort to make he
drove to the hospital.

Doctor Carey was not in his office, and the Harvester sat in the
revolving chair before the desk and gripped his head between his hands
as he tried to think. He could not remember anything more he could
have done, but since what he had done only ended in failure, he was
reproaching himself wildly that he had taken his eyes from the Girl an
instant after recognizing her. Yet it was in his blood to be decent and
he could not have run away and left a frightened woman and a hurt child.
Trusting to his fleet feet and strength he had taken time to replace the
box also, and then had met the crowd and delay. Just for the instant it
appeared to him as if he had done all a man could, and he had not found
her. If he allowed her to return to Chicago, probably he never would. He
leaned his head on his hands and groaned in discouragement.

Doctor Carey whirled the chair so that it faced him before the Harvester
realized that he was not alone.

"What's the trouble, David?" he asked tersely.

The Harvester lifted a strained face.

"I came for help," he said.

"Well you will get it! All you have to do is to state what you want."

That seemed simplicity itself to the doctor. But when it came to putting
his case into words, it was not easy for the Harvester.

"Go on!" said the doctor.

"You'll think me a fool."

The doctor laughed heartily.

"No doubt!" he said soothingly. "No doubt, David! Probably you are; so
why shouldn't I think so. But remember this, when we make the biggest
fools of ourselves that is precisely the time when we need friends, and
when they stick to us the tightest, if they are worth while. I've been
waiting since latter February for you to tell me. We can fix it, of
course; there's always a way. Go on!"

"Well I wasn't fooling about the dream and the vision I told you of
then, Doc. I did have a dream--and it was a dream of love. I did see a
vision--and it was a beautiful woman."

"I hope you are not nursing that experience as something exclusive and
peculiar to you," said the doctor. "There is not a normal, sane man
living who has not dreamed of love and the most exquisite woman who came
from the clouds or anywhere and was gracious to him. That's a part of a
man's experience in this world, and it happens to most of us, not once,
but repeatedly. It's a case where the wish fathers the dream."

"Well it hasn't happened to me 'on repeated occasions,' but it did one
night, and by dawn I was converted. How CAN a dream be so real, Doc?
How could I see as clearly as I ever saw in the daytime in my most alert
moment, hear every step and garment rustle, scent the perfume of hair,
and feel warm breath strike my face? I don't understand it!"

"Neither does any one else! All you need say is that your dream was real
as life. Go on!"

"I built a new cabin and pretty well overturned the place and I've been
making furniture I thought a woman would like, and carrying things from
town ever since."

"Gee! It was reality to you, lad!"

"Nothing ever more so," said the Harvester.

"And of course, you have been looking for her?"

"And this morning I saw her!"

"David!"

"Not the ghost of a chance for a mistake. Her height, her eyes, her
hair, her walk, her face; only something terrible has happened since she
came to me. It was the same girl, but she is ill and in trouble now."

"Where is she?"

"Do you suppose I'd be here if I knew?"

"David, are you dreaming in daytime?"

"She got off the Chicago train this morning while I was helping Daniels
load a big truck of express matter. Some of it was mine, and it was
important. Just at the wrong instant a box fell and knocked down a child
and I got in a jam----"

"And as it was you, of course you stopped to pick up the child and do
everything decent for other folks, before you thought of yourself, and
so you lost her. You needn't tell me anything more. David, if I find
her, and prove to you that she has been married ten years and has an
interesting family, will you thank me?"

"Can't be done!" said the Harvester calmly. "She has been married only
since she gave herself to me in February, and she is not a mother. You
needn't bank on that."

"You are mighty sure!"

"Why not? I told you the dream was real, and now that I have seen her,
and she is in this very town, why shouldn't I be sure?"

"What have you done?"

The Harvester told him.

"What are you going to do next?"

"Talk it over with you and decide."

The doctor laughed.

"Well here are a few things that occur to me without time for thought.
Talk to the ticket agents, and leave her description with them. Make it
worth their while to be on the lookout, and if she goes anywhere to find
out all they can. They could make an excuse of putting her address on
her ticket envelope, and get it that way. See the baggagemen. Post the
day police on Main Street. There is no chance for her to escape you. A
full-grown woman doesn't vanish. How did she act when she got off the
car? Did she appear familiar?"

"No. She was a stranger. For an instant she looked around as if she
expected some one, then she followed the crowd. There must have been an
automobile waiting or she took a street car. Something whirled her out
of sight in a few seconds."

"Well we will get her in range again. Now for the most minute
description you can give."

The Harvester hesitated. He did not care to describe the Dream Girl to
any one, much less the living, suffering face and poorly clad form of
the reality.

"Cut out your scruples," laughed the doctor. "You have asked me to help
you; how can I if I don't know what kind of a woman to look for?"

"Very tall and slender," said the Harvester. "Almost as tall as I am."

"Unusually tall you think?"

"I know!"

"That's a good point for identification. How about her complexion, hair,
and eyes?"

"Very large, dark eyes, and a great mass of black hair."

The doctor roared.

"The eyes may help," he said. "All women have masses of hair these days.
I hope----"

"Her hair is fast to her head," said the Harvester indignantly. "I saw
it at close range, and I know. It went around like a crown."

The doctor choked down a laugh. He wanted to say that every woman's hair
was like a crown at present, but there were things no man ventured with
David Langston; those who knew him best, least of any. So he suggested,
"And her colouring?"

"She was white and rosy, a lovely thing in the dream," said the
Harvester, "but something dreadful has happened. That's all wiped out
now. She was very pale when she left the car."

"Car sick, maybe."

"Soul sick!" was the grim reply.

Then Doctor Carey appeared so disturbed the Harvester noticed it.

"You needn't think I'd be here prating about her if I wasn't FORCED.
If she had been rosy and well as she was in the dream, I'd have made
my hunt alone and found her, too. But when I saw she was sick and in
trouble, it took all the courage out of me, and I broke for help. She
must be found at once, and when she is you are probably the first man
I'll want. I am going to put up a pretty stiff search myself, and if I
find her I'll send or get her to you if I can. Put her in the best ward
you have and anything money will do----"

The face of the doctor was growing troubled.

"Day coach or Pullman?" he asked.

"Day."

"How was she dressed?"

"Small black hat, very plain. Gray jacket and skirt, neat as a flower."

"What you'd call expensively dressed?"

The Harvester hesitated.

"What I'd call carefully dressed, but----but poverty poor, if you will
have it, Doc."

Doctor Carey's lips closed and then opened in sudden resolution.

"David, I don't like it," he said tersely.

The Harvester met his eye and purposely misunderstood him.

"Neither do I!" he exclaimed. "I hate it! There is something wrong with
the whole world when a woman having a face full of purity, intellect,
and refinement of extreme type glances around her like a hunted thing;
when her appearance seems to indicate that she has starved her body to
clothe it. I know what is in your mind, Doc, but if I were you I
wouldn't put it into words, and I wouldn't even THINK it. Has it been
your experience in this world that women not fit to know skimp their
bodies to cover them? Does a girl of light character and little brain
have the hardihood to advance a foot covered with a broken shoe? If I
could tell you that she rode in a Pullman, and wore exquisite clothing,
you would be doing something. The other side of the picture shuts you up
like a clam, and makes you appear shocked. Let me tell you this: No
other woman I ever saw anywhere on God's footstool had a face of more
delicate refinement, eyes of purer intelligence. I am of the woods, and
while they don't teach me how to shine in society, they do instil always
and forever the fineness of nature and her ways. I have her lessons so
well learned they help me more than anything else to discern the
qualities of human nature. If you are my friend, and have any faith at
all in my common sense, get up and do something!"

The doctor arose promptly.

"David, I'm an ass," he said. "Unusually lop-eared, and blind in the
bargain. But before I ask you to forgive me, I want you to remember two
things: First, she did not visit me in my dreams; and, second, I did not
see her in reality. I had nothing to judge from except what you
said: you seemed reluctant to tell me, and what you did say
was----was----disturbing to a friend of yours. I have not the slightest
doubt if I had seen her I would agree with you. We seldom disagree,
David. Now, will you forgive me?"

The Harvester suddenly faced a window. When at last he turned, "The
offence lies with me," he said, "I was hasty. Are you going to help me?"

"With all my heart! Go home and work until your head clears, then come
back in the morning. She did not come from Chicago for a day. You've
done all I know to do at present."

"Thank you," said the Harvester.

He went to Betsy and Belshazzar, and slowly drove up and down the
streets until Betsy protested and calmly turned homeward. The Harvester
smiled ruefully as he allowed her to proceed.

"Go slow and take it easy," he said as they reached the country. "I want
to think."

Betsy stopped at the barn, the white doves took wing, and Ajax screamed
shrilly before the Harvester aroused in the slightest to anything around
him. Then he looked at Belshazzar and said emphatically: "Now, partner,
don't ever again interfere when I am complying with the observances of
my religion. Just look what I'd have missed if I hadn't made good with
that order!"



CHAPTER VI. TO LABOUR AND TO WAIT

"We have reached the 'beginning of the end,' Ajax!" said the Harvester,
as the peacock ceased screaming and came to seek food from his hand.
"We have seen the Girl. Now we must locate her and convince her that
Medicine Woods is her happy home. I feel quite equal to the latter
proposition, Ajax, but how the nation to find her sticks me. I can't
make a search so open that she will know and resent it. She must have
all the consideration ever paid the most refined woman, but she also
has got to be found, and that speedily. When I remember that look on her
face, as if horrors were snatching at her skirts, it takes all the grit
out of me. I feel weak as a sapling. And she needs all my strength. I've
simply got to brace up. I'll work a while and then perhaps I can think."

So the Harvester began the evening routine. He thought he did not want
anything to eat, but when he opened the cupboard and smelled the food he
learned that he was a hungry man and he cooked and ate a good supper. He
put away everything carefully, for even the kitchen was dainty and fresh
and he wanted to keep it so for her. When he finished he went into the
living-room, stood before the fireplace, and studied the collection of
half-finished candlesticks grouped upon it. He picked up several and
examined them closely, but realized that he could not bind himself to
the exactions of carving that evening. He took a key from his pocket and
unlocked her door. Every day he had been going there to improve upon his
work for her, and he loved the room, the outlook from its windows; he
was very proud of the furniture he had made. There was no paper-thin
covering on her chairs, bed, and dressing table. The tops, seats, and
posts were solid wood, worth hundreds of dollars for veneer.

To-night he folded his arms and stood on the sill hesitating. While
she was a dream, he had loved to linger in her room. Now that she was
reality, he paused. In one golden May day the place had become sacred.
Since he had seen the Girl that room was so hers that he was hesitating
about entering because of this fact. It was as if the tall, slender form
stood before the chest of drawers or sat at the dressing table and he
did not dare enter unless he were welcome. Softly he closed the door and
went away. He wandered to the dry-house and turned the bark and roots on
the trays, but the air stifled him and he hurried out. He tried to work
in the packing room, but walls smothered him and again he sought the
open.

He espied a bundle of osier-bound, moss-covered ferns that he had found
in the woods, and brought the shovel to transplant them; but the
work worried him, and he hurried through with it. Then he looked for
something else to do and saw an ax. He caught it up and with lusty
strokes began swinging it. When he had chopped wood until he was very
tired he went to bed. Sleep came to the strong, young frame and he awoke
in the morning refreshed and hopeful.

He wondered why he had bothered Doctor Carey. The Harvester felt able
that morning to find his Dream Girl without assistance before the day
was over. It was merely a matter of going to the city and locating a
woman. Yesterday, it had been a question of whether she really existed.
To-day, he knew. Yesterday, it had meant a search possibly as wide
as earth to find her. To-day, it was narrowed to only one location so
small, compared with Chicago, that the Harvester felt he could sift
its population with his fingers, and pick her from others at his first
attempt. If she were visiting there probably she would rest during the
night, and be on the streets to-day.

When he remembered her face he doubted it. He decided to spend part
of the time on the business streets and the remainder in the residence
portions of the city. Because it was uncertain when he would return,
everything was fed a double portion, and Betsy was left at a livery
stable with instructions to care for her until he came. He did not know
where the search would lead him. For several hours he slowly walked the
business district and then ranged farther, but not a sight of her. He
never had known that Onabasha was so large. On its crowded streets he
did not feel that he could sift the population through his fingers, nor
could he open doors and search houses without an excuse.

Some small boys passed him eating bananas, and the Harvester looked at
his watch and was amazed to find that the day had advanced until two
o'clock in the afternoon. He was tired and hungry. He went into a
restaurant and ordered lunch; as he waited a girl serving tables smiled
at him. Any other time the Harvester would have returned at least a
pleasant look, and gone his way. To-day he scowled at her, and ate in
hurried discomfort. On the streets again, he had no idea where to go and
so he went to the hospital.

"I expected you early this morning," was the greeting of Doctor Carey.
"Where have you been and what have you done?"

"Nothing," said the Harvester. "I was so sure she would be on the
streets I just watched, but I didn't see her."

"We will go to the depot," said the doctor. "The first thing is to keep
her from leaving town."

They arranged with the ticket agents, expressmen, telegraphers, and, as
they left, the Harvester stopped and tipped the train caller, offering
further reward worth while if he would find the Girl.

"Now we will go to the police station," said the doctor.

"I'll see the chief and have him issue a general order to his men to
watch for her, but if I were you I'd select a half dozen in the down
town district, and give them a little tip with a big promise!"

"Good Lord! How I hate this," groaned the Harvester.

"Want to find her by yourself?" questioned his friend.

"Yes," said the Harvester, "I do! And I would, if it hadn't been for
her ghastly face. That drives me to resort to any measures. The
probabilities are that she is lying sick somewhere, and if her comfort
depends on the purse that dressed her, she will suffer. Doc, do you know
how awful this is?"

"I know that you've got a great imagination. If the woods make all men
as sensitive as you are, those who have business to transact should stay
out of them. Take a common-sense view. Look at this as I do. If she was
strong enough to travel in a day coach from Chicago; she can't be so
very ill to-day. Leaving life by the inch isn't that easy. She will be
alive this time next year, whether you find her or not. The chances are
that her stress was mental anyway, and trouble almost never overcomes
any one."

"You, a doctor and say that!"

"Oh, I mean instantaneously----in a day! Of course if it grinds away
for years! But youth doesn't allow it to do that. It throws it off, and
grows hopeful and happy again. She won't die; put that out of your
mind. If I were you I would go home now and go straight on with my work,
trusting to the machinery you have set in motion. I know most of the
men with whom we have talked. They will locate her in a week or less.
It's their business. It isn't yours. It's your job to be ready for her,
and have enough ahead to support her when they find her. Try to realize
that there are now a dozen men on hunt for her, and trust them. Go back
to your work, and I will come full speed in the motor when the first man
sights her. That ought to satisfy you. I've told all of them to call me
at the hospital, and I will tell my assistant what to do in case a call
comes while I am away. Straighten your face! Go back to Medicine Woods
and harvest your crops, and before you know it she will be located. Then
you can put on your Sunday clothes and show yourself, and see if you can
make her take notice."

"Idiot!" exclaimed the Harvester, but he started home. When he arrived
he attended to his work and then sat down to think.

"Doc is right," was his ultimate conclusion. "She can't leave the city,
she can't move around in it, she can't go anywhere, without being seen.
There's one more point: I must tell Carey to post all the doctors to
report if they have such a call. That's all I can think of. I'll
go to-night, and then I'll look over the ginseng for parasites, and
to-morrow I'll dive into the late spring growth and work until I haven't
time to think. I've let cranesbill get a week past me now, and it can't
be dispensed with."

So the following morning, when the Harvester had completed his work at
the cabin and barn and breakfasted, he took a mattock and a big hempen
bag, and followed the path to the top of the hill. As it ran along the
lake bank he descended on the other side to several acres of cleared
land, where he raised corn for his stock, potatoes, and coarser garden
truck, for which there was not space in the smaller enclosure close the
cabin. Around the edges of these fields, and where one of them sloped
toward the lake, he began grubbing a variety of grass having tall stems
already over a foot in height at half growth. From each stem waved four
or five leaves of six or eight inches length and the top showed forming
clusters of tiny spikelets.

"I am none too early for you," he muttered to himself as he ran the
mattock through the rich earth, lifting the long, tough, jointed root
stalks of pale yellow, from every section of which broke sprays of fine
rootlets. "None too early for you, and as you are worth only seven cents
a pound, you couldn't be considered a 'get-rich-quick' expedient, so
I'll only stop long enough with you to gather what I think my customers
will order, and amass a fortune a little later picking mullein flowers
at seventy-five cents a pound. What a crop I've got coming!"

The Harvester glanced ahead, where in the cleared soil of the bank grew
large plants with leaves like yellow-green felt and tall bloom stems
rising. Close them flourished other species requiring dry sandy soil,
that gradually changed as it approached the water until it became
covered with rank abundance of short, wiry grass, half the blades of
which appeared red. Numerous everywhere he could see the grayish-white
leaves of Parnassus grass. As the season advanced it would lift
heart-shaped velvet higher, and before fall the stretch of emerald would
be starred with white-faced, green-striped flowers.

"Not a prettier sight on earth," commented the Harvester, "than just
swale wire grass in September making a fine, thick background to set off
those delicate starry flowers on their slender stems. I must remember to
bring her to see that."

His eyes followed the growth to the water. As the grass drew closer
moisture it changed to the rank, sweet, swamp variety, then came
bulrushes, cat-tails, water smartweed, docks, and in the water blue flag
lifted folded buds; at its feet arose yellow lily leaves and farther out
spread the white. As the light struck the surface the Harvester imagined
he could see the little green buds several inches below. Above all arose
wild rice he had planted for the birds. The red wings swayed on the
willows and tilted on every stem that would bear their weight, singing
their melodious half-chanted notes, "O-ka-lee!"

Beneath them the ducks gobbled, splashed, and chattered; grebe and coot
voices could be distinguished; king rails at times flashed into sight
and out again; marsh wrens scolded and chattered; occasionally a
kingfisher darted around the lake shore, rolling his rattling cry and
flashing his azure coat and gleaming white collar. On a hollow tree
in the woods a yellow hammer proved why he was named, because he
carpentered industriously to enlarge the entrance to the home he was
excavating in a dead tree; and sailing over the lake and above the woods
in grace scarcely surpassed by any, a lonesome turkey buzzard awaited
his mate's decision as to which hollow log was most suitable for their
home.

The Harvester stuffed the grass roots in the bag until it would hold no
more and stood erect to wipe his face, for the sun was growing warm. As
he drew his handkerchief across his brow, the south wind struck him with
enough intensity to attract attention. Instantly the Harvester removed
his hat, rolled it up, and put it into his pocket. He stood an instant
delighting in the wind and then spoke.

"Allow me to express my most fervent thanks for your kindness," he said.
"I thought probably you would take that message, since it couldn't mean
much to you, and it meant all the world to me. I thought you would carry
it, but, I confess, I scarcely expected the answer so soon. The only
thing that could make me more grateful to you would be to know exactly
where she is: but you must understand that it's like a peep into Heaven
to have her existence narrowed to one place. I'm bound to be able to
say inside a few days, she lives at number----I don't know yet, on
street----I'll find out soon, in the closest city, Onabasha. And I know
why you brought her, South Wind. If ever a girl's cheeks need fanning
with your breezes, and painting with sun kisses, I wouldn't mind, since
this is strictly private, adding a few of mine; if ever any one needed
flowers, birds, fresh air, water, and rest! Good Lord, South Wind, did
you ever reach her before you carried that message? I think not! But
Onabasha isn't so large. You and the sun should get your innings there.
I do hope she is not trying to work! I can attend to that; and so there
will be more time when she is found, I'd better hustle now."

He picked up the bag and returned to the dry-house, where he carefully
washed the roots and spread them on the trays. Then he took the same
bag and mattock and going through the woods in the opposite direction
he came to a heavy growth in a cleared space of high ground. The bloom
heads were forming and the plant was half matured. The Harvester dug a
cylindrical, tapering root, wrinkling lengthwise, wiped it clean, broke
and tasted it. He made a wry face. He stood examining the white wood
with its brown-red bark and, deciding that it was in prime condition, he
began digging the plants. It was common wayside "Bouncing Bet," but the
Harvester called it "soapwort." He took every other plant in his way
across the bed, and when he digged a heavy load he carried it home,
stripped the leaves, and spread them on trays, while the roots he
topped, washed, and put to dry also. Then he whistled for Belshazzar and
went to lunch.

As he passed down the road to the cabin his face was a study of
conflicting emotions, and his eyes had a far away appearance of deep
thought. Every tree of his stretch of forest was rustling fresh leaves
to shelter him; dogwood, wild crab, and hawthorn offered their flowers;
earth held up her tribute in painted trillium faces, spring beauties,
and violets, blue, white, and yellow. Mosses, ferns, and lichen
decorated the path; all the birds greeted him in friendship, and
sang their purest melodies. The sky was blue, the sun bright, the air
perfumed for him; Belshazzar, always true to his name, protected every
footstep; Ajax, the shimmering green and gold wonder, came up the hill
to meet him; the white doves circled above his head. Stumbling half
blindly, the Harvester passed unheeding among them, and went into the
cabin. When he came out he stood a long time in deep study, but at last
he returned to the woods.

"Perhaps they will have found her before night," he said. "I'll harvest
the cranesbill yet, because it's growing late for it, and then I'll see
how they are coming on. Maybe they'd know her if they met her, and maybe
they wouldn't. She may wear different clothing, and freshen up after her
trip. She might have been car sick, as Doc suggested, and appear very
different when she feels better."

He skirted the woods around the northeast end and stopped at a big bed
of exquisite growth. Tall, wiry stems sprang upward almost two feet in
height; leaves six inches across were cut in ragged lobes almost to the
base, and here and there, enough to colour the entire bed a delicate
rose or sometimes a violet purple, the first flowers were unfolding. The
Harvester lifted a root and tasted it.

"No doubt about you being astringent," he muttered. "You have enough
tannin in you to pucker a mushroom. By the way, those big, corn-cobby
fellows should spring up with the next warm rain, and the hotels and
restaurants always pay high prices. I must gather a few bushels."

He looked over the bed of beautiful wild alum and hesitated.

"I vow I hate to touch you," he said. "You are a picture right now, and
in a week you will be a miracle. It seems a shame to tear up a plant for
its roots, just at flowering time, and I can't avoid breaking down half
I don't take, getting the ones I do. I wish you were not so pretty! You
are one of the colours I love most. You remind me of red-bud, blazing
star, and all those exquisite magenta shades that poets, painters, and
the Almighty who made them love so much they hesitate about using them
lavishly. You are so delicate and graceful and so modest. I wish she
could see you! I got to stop this or I won't be able to lift a root. I
never would if the ten cents a pound I'll get out of it were the only
consideration."

The Harvester gripped the mattock and advanced to the bed. "What I must
be thinking is that you are indispensable to the sick folks. The steady
demand for you proves your value, and of course, humanity comes first,
after all. If I remain in the woods alone much longer I'll get to the
place where I'm not so sure that it does. Seems as if animals, birds,
flowers, trees, and insects as well, have their right to life also. But
it's for me to remember the sick folks! If I thought the Girl would get
some of it now, I could overturn the bed with a stout heart. If any one
ever needed a tonic, I think she does. Maybe some of this will reach
her. If it does, I hope it will make her cheeks just the lovely pink of
the bloom. Oh Lord! If only she hadn't appeared so sick and frightened!
What is there in all this world of sunshine to make a girl glance around
her like that? I wish I knew! Maybe they will have found her by night."

The Harvester began work on the bed, but he knelt and among the damp
leaves from the spongy black earth he lifted the roots with his fingers
and carefully straightened and pressed down the plants he did not take.
This required more time than usual, but his heart was so sore he could
not be rough with anything, most of all a flower. So he harvested the
wild alum by hand, and heaped large stacks of roots around the edges of
the bed. Often he paused as he worked and on his knees stared through
the forest as if he hoped perhaps she would realize his longing for her,
and come to him in the wood as she had across the water. Over and
over he repeated, "Perhaps they will find her by night!" and that so
intensified the meaning that once he said it aloud. His face clouded and
grew dark.

"Dealish nice business!" he said. "I am here in the woods digging flower
roots, and a gang of men in the city are searching for the girl I love.
If ever a job seemed peculiarly a man's own, it appears this would be.
What business has any other man spying after my woman? Why am I not down
there doing my own work, as I always have done it? Who's more likely to
find her than I am? It seems as if there would be an instinct that
would lead me straight to her, if I'd go. And you can wager I'll go fast
enough."

The Harvester appeared as if he would start that instant, but with lips
closely shut he finally forced himself to go on with his work. When he
had rifled the bed, and uprooted all he cared to take during one season,
he carried the roots to the lake shore below the curing house, and
spread them on a platform he had built. He stepped into his boat and
began dashing pails of water over them and using a brush. As he worked
he washed away the woody scars of last year's growth, and the tiny buds
appearing for the coming season.

Belshazzar sat on the opposite bank and watched the operation; and Ajax
came down and, flying to a dead stump, erected and slowly waved his
train to attract the sober-faced man who paid no heed. He left the roots
to drain while he prepared supper, then placed them on the trays, now
filled to overflowing, and was glad he had finished. He could not cure
anything else at present if he wanted to. He was as far advanced as he
had been at the same time the previous year. Then he dressed neatly and
locking the Girl's room, and leaving Belshazzar to protect it, he went
to Onabasha.

"Bravo!" cried Doctor Carey as the Harvester entered his office. "You
are heroic to wait all day for news. How much stuff have you gathered?"

"Three crops. How many missing women have you located?"

The doctor laughed. There was no sign of a smile on the face of the
Harvester.

"You didn't really expect her to come to light the first day? That would
be too easy! We can't find her in a minute."

"It will be no surprise to me if you can't find her at all. I am not
expecting another man to do what I don't myself."

"You are not hunting her. You are harvesting the woods. The men you
employ are to find her."

"Maybe I am, and maybe I am not," said the Harvester slowly. "To me
it appears to be a poor stick of a man who coolly proceeds with money
making, and trusts to men who haven't even seen her to search for the
girl he loves. I think a few hours of this is about all my patience will
endure."

"What are you going to do?"

"I don't know," said the Harvester. "But you can bank on one thing
sure----I'm going to do something! I've had my fill of this. Thank you
for all you've done, and all you are going to do. My head is not clear
enough yet to decide anything with any sense, but maybe I'll hit on
something soon. I'm for the streets for a while."

"Better go home and go to bed. You seem very tired."

"I am," said the Harvester. "The only way to endure this is to work
myself down. I'm all right, and I'll be careful, but I rather think I'll
find her myself."

"Better go on with your work as we planned."

"I'll think about it," said the Harvester as he went out.

Until he was too tired to walk farther he slowly paced the streets of
the city, and then followed the home road through the valley and up the
hill to Medicine Woods. When he came to Singing Water, Belshazzar heard
his steps on the bridge, and came bounding to meet him. The Harvester
stretched himself on a seat and turned his face to the sky. It was a
deep, dark-blue bowl, closely set with stars, and a bright moon shed a
soft May radiance on the young earth. The lake was flooded with light,
and the big trees of the forest crowning the hill were silver coroneted.
The unfolding leaves had hidden the new cabin from the bridge, but the
driveway shone white, and already the upspringing bushes hedged it in.
Insects were humming lazily in the perfumed night air, and across the
lake a courting whip-poor-will was explaining to his sweetheart just
how much and why he loved her. A few bats were wavering in air hunting
insects, and occasionally an owl or a nighthawk crossed the lake.
Killdeer were glorying in the moonlight and night flight, and cried in
pure, clear notes as they sailed over the water. The Harvester was tired
and filled with unrest as he stretched on the bridge, but the longer
he lay the more the enfolding voices comforted him. All of them were
waiting and working out their lives to the legitimate end; there was
nothing else for him to do. He need not follow instinct or profit by
chance. He was a man; he could plan and reason.

The air grew balmy and some big, soft clouds swept across the moon. The
Harvester felt the dampness of rising dew, and went to the cabin. He
looked at it long in the moonlight and told himself that he could see
how much the plants, vines, and ferns had grown since the previous
night. Without making a light, he threw himself on the bed in the
outdoor room, and lay looking through the screening at the lake and sky.
He was working his brain to think of some manner in which to start a
search for the Dream Girl that would have some probability of success to
recommend it, but he could settle on no feasible plan. At last he fell
asleep, and in the night soft rain wet his face. He pulled an oilcloth
sheet over the bed, and lay breathing deeply of the damp, perfumed air
as he again slept. In the morning brilliant sunshine awoke him and he
arose to find the earth steaming.

"If ever there was a perfect mushroom day!" he said to Belshazzar. "We
must hurry and feed the stock and ourselves and gather some. They mean
real money."



CHAPTER VII. THE QUEST OF THE DREAM GIRL

The Harvester breakfasted, fed the stock, hitched Betsy to the spring
wagon, and went into the dripping, steamy woods. If anyone had asked him
that morning concerning his idea of Heaven, he never would have dreamed
of describing a place of gold-paved streets, crystal pillars, jewelled
gates, and thrones of ivory. These things were beyond the man's
comprehension and he would not have admired or felt at home in such
magnificence if it had been materialized for him. He would have told
you that a floor of last year's brown leaves, studded with myriad flower
faces, big, bark-encased pillars of a thousand years, jewels on every
bush, shrub, and tree, and tilting thrones on which gaudy birds almost
burst themselves to voice the joy of life, while their bright-eyed
little mates peered questioningly at him over nest rims----he would have
told you that Medicine Woods on a damp, sunny May morning was Heaven.
And he would have added that only one angel, tall and slender, with the
pink of health on her cheeks and the dew of happiness in her dark eyes,
was necessary to enter and establish glory. Everything spoke to him that
morning, but the Harvester was silent. It had been his habit to talk
constantly to Belshazzar, Ajax, his work, even the winds and perfumes;
it had been his method of dissipating solitude, but to-day he had no
words, even for these dear friends. He only opened his soul to beauty,
and steadily climbed the hill to the crest, and then down the other side
to the rich, half-shaded, half-open spaces, where big, rough mushrooms
sprang in a night similar to the one just passed.

He could see them awaiting him from afar. He began work with rapid
fingers, being careful to break off the heads, but not to pull up the
roots. When four heaping baskets were filled he cut heavily leaved
branches to spread over them, and started to Onabasha. As usual,
Belshazzar rode beside him and questioned the Harvester when he politely
suggested to Betsy that she make a little haste.

"Have you forgotten that mushrooms are perishable?" he asked. "If we
don't get these to the city all woodsy and fresh we can't sell them.
Wonder where we can do the best? The hotels pay well. Really, the
biggest prices could be had by----"

Then the Harvester threw back his head and began to laugh, and
he laughed, and he laughed. A crow on the fence Joined him, and a
kingfisher, heading for Loon Lake, and then Belshazzar caught the
infection.

"Begorry! The very idea!" cried the Harvester. "'Heaven helps them
that help themselves.' Now you just watch us manoeuvre for assistance,
Belshazzar, old boy! Here we go!"

Then the laugh began again. It continued all the way to Onabasha and
even into the city. The Harvester drove through the most prosperous
street until he reached the residence district. At the first home
he stopped, gave the lines to Belshazzar, and, taking a basket of
mushrooms, went up the walk and rang the bell.

"All groceries should be delivered at the back door," snapped a pert
maid, before he had time to say a word.

The Harvester lifted his hat.

"Will you kindly tell the lady of the house that I wish to speak with
her?"

"What name, please?"

"I want to show her some fine mushrooms, freshly gathered," he answered.

How she did it the Harvester never knew. The first thing he realized was
that the door had closed before his face, and the basket had been picked
deftly from his fingers and was on the other side. After a short time
the maid returned.

"What do you want for them, please?"

The last thing on earth the Harvester wanted to do was to part with
those mushrooms, so he took one long, speculative look down the hall and
named a price he thought would be prohibitive.

"One dollar a dozen."

"How many are there?"

"I count them as I sell them. I do not know."

The door closed again. Presently it opened and the maid knelt on the
floor before him and counted the mushrooms one by one into a dish pan
and in a few minutes brought back seven dollars and fifty cents. The
chagrined Harvester, feeling like a thief, put the money in his pocket,
and turned away.

"I was to tell you," said she, "that you are to bring all you have to
sell here, and the next time please go to the kitchen door."

"Must be fond of mushrooms," said the disgruntled Harvester.

"They are a great delicacy, and there are visitors." The Harvester ached
to set the girl to one side and walk through the house, but he did not
dare; so he returned to the street, whistled to Betsy to come, and went
to the next gate. Here he hesitated. Should he risk further snubbing at
the front door or go back at once. If he did, he only would see a maid.
As he stood an instant debating, the door of the house he just had
left opened and the girl ran after him. "If you have more, we will take
them," she called.

The Harvester gasped for breath.

"They have to be used at once," he suggested.

"She knows that. She wants to treat her friends."

"Well she has got enough for a banquet," he said. "I--I don't usually
sell more than a dozen or two in one place."

"I don't see why you can't let her have them if you have more."

"Perhaps I have orders to fill for regular customers," suggested the
Harvester.

"And perhaps you haven't," said the maid. "You ought to be ashamed not
to let people who are willing to pay your outrageous prices have them.
It's regular highway robbery."

"Possibly that's the reason I decline to hold up one party twice," said
the Harvester as he entered the gate and went up the walk to the front
door.

"You should be taught your place," called the maid after him.

The Harvester again rang the bell. Another maid opened the door, and
once more he asked to speak with the lady of the house. As the girl
turned, a handsome old woman in cap and morning gown came down the
stairs.

"What have you there?" she asked.

The Harvester lifted the leaves and exposed the musky, crimpled, big
mushrooms.

"Oh!" she cried in delight. "Indeed, yes! We are very fond of them. I
will take the basket, and divide with my sons. You are sure you have no
poisonous ones among them?"

"Quite sure," said the Harvester faintly.

"How much do you want for the basket?"

"They are a dollar a dozen; I haven't counted them."

"Dear me! Isn't that rather expensive?"

"It is. Very!" said the Harvester. "So expensive that most people don't
think of taking over a dozen. They are large and very rich, so they go a
long way."

"I suppose you have to spend a great deal of time hunting them? It does
seem expensive, but they are fresh, and the boys are so fond of them.
I'm not often extravagant, I'll just take the lot. Sarah, bring a pan."

Again the Harvester stood and watched an entire basket counted over and
carried away, and he felt the robber he had been called as he took the
money.

At the next house he had learned a lesson. He carpeted a basket with
leaves and counted out a dozen and a half into it, leaving the remainder
in the wagon. Three blocks on one side of the street exhausted his
store and he was showered with orders. He had not seen any one that even
resembled a dark-eyed girl. As he came from the last house a big, red
motor shot past and then suddenly slowed and backed beside his wagon.

"What in the name of sense are you doing?" demanded Doctor Carey.

"Invading the residence district of Onabasha," said the Harvester.
"Madam, would you like some nice, fresh, country mushrooms? I guarantee
that there are no poisonous ones among them, and they were gathered this
morning. Considering their rarity and the difficult work of collecting,
they are exceedingly low at my price. I am offering these for five
dollars a dozen, madam, and for mercy sake don't take them or I'll have
no excuse to go to the next house."

The doctor stared, then understood, and began to laugh. When at last he
could speak he said, "David, I'll bet you started with three bushels and
began at the head of this street, and they are all gone."

"Put up a good one!" said the Harvester. "You win. The first house I
tried they ordered me to the back door, took a market basket full away
from me by force, tried to buy the load, and I didn't see any one save a
maid."

The doctor lay on the steering gear and faintly groaned.

The Harvester regarded him sympathetically. "Isn't it a crime?" he
questioned. "Mushrooms are no go. I can see that!----or rather they are
entirely too much of a go. I never saw anything in such demand. I must
seek a less popular article for my purpose. To-morrow look out for me.
I shall begin where I left off to-day, but I will have changed my
product."

"David, for pity sake," peeped the doctor.

"What do I care how I do it, so I locate her?" superbly inquired the
Harvester.

"But you won't find her!" gasped the doctor.

"I've come as close it as you so far, anyway," said the Harvester. "Your
mushrooms are on the desk in your office."

He drove slowly up and down the streets until Betsy wabbled on her legs.
Then he left her to rest and walked until he wabbled; and by that time
it was dark, so he went home.

At the first hint of dawn he was at work the following morning. With
loaded baskets closely covered, he started to Onabasha, and began where
he had quit the day before. This time he carried a small, crudely
fashioned bark basket, leaf-covered, and he rang at the front door with
confidence.

Every one seemed to have a maid in that part of the city, for a freshly
capped and aproned girl opened the door.

"Are there any young women living here?" blandly inquired the Harvester.

"What's that of your business?" demanded the maid.

The Harvester flushed, but continued, "I am offering something
especially intended for young women. If there are none, I will not
trouble you."

"There are several."

"Will you please ask them if they would care for bouquets of violets,
fresh from the woods?"

"How much are they, and how large are the bunches?"

"Prices differ, and they are the right size to appear well. They had
better see for themselves."

The maid reached for the basket, but the Harvester drew back.

"I keep them in my possession," he said. "You may take a sample."

He lifted the leaves and drew forth a medium-sized bunch of long-stemmed
blue violets with their leaves. The flowers were fresh, crisp, and
strong odours of the woods arose from them.

"Oh!" cried the maid. "Oh, how lovely!"

She hurried away with them and returned carrying a purse.

"I want two more bunches," she said. "How much are they?"

"Are the girls who want them dark or fair?"

"What difference does that make?"

"I have blue violets for blondes, yellow for brunettes, and white for
the others."

"Well I never! One is fair, and two have brown hair and blue eyes."

"One blue and two whites," said the Harvester calmly, as if matching
women's hair and eyes with flowers were an inherited vocation. "They are
twenty cents a bunch."

"Aha!" he chortled to himself as he whistled to Betsy. "At last we have
it. There are no dark-eyed girls here. Now we are making headway."

Down the street he went, with varying fortune, but with patience and
persistence at every house he at last managed to learn whether there was
a dark-eyed girl. There did not seem to be many. Long before his store
of yellow violets was gone the last blue and white had disappeared. But
he calmly went on asking for dark-eyed girls, and explaining that all
the blue and white were taken, because fair women were most numerous.

At one house the owner, who reminded the Harvester of his mother,
came to the door. He uncovered and in his suavest tones inquired if
a brunette young woman lived there and if she would like a nosegay of
yellow violets.

"Well bless my soul!" cried she. "What is this world coming to? Do
you mean to tell me that there are now able-bodied men offering at our
doors, flowers to match our girls' complexions?"

"Yes madam?" said the Harvester gravely, "and also selling them as fast
as he can show them, at prices that make a profit very well worth while.
I had an equal number of blue and white, but I see the dark girls are
very much in the minority. The others were gone long ago, and I now have
flowers to offer brunettes only."

"Well forever more! And you don't call that fiddlin' business for a big,
healthy, young man?"

The Harvester's gay laugh was infectious.

"I do not," he said. "I have to start as soon as I can see, tramp long
distances in wet woods and gather the violets on my knees, make them
into bunches, and bring them here in water to keep them fresh. I have
another occupation. I only kill time on these, but I would be ashamed to
tell you what I have gotten for them this morning."

"Humph! I'm glad to hear it!" said the woman. "Shame in some form is a
sign of grace. I have no use for a human being without a generous supply
of it. There is a very beautiful dark-eyed girl in the house, and I will
take two bunches for her. How much are they?"

"I have only three remaining," said the Harvester. "Would you like to
allow her to make her own selection?"

"When I'm giving things I usually take my choice. I want that, and that
one."

"As my stock is so nearly out, I'll make the two for twenty," said the
Harvester. "Won't you accept the last one from me, because you remind me
just a little of my mother?"

"I will indeed," said she. "Thank you very much! I shall love to have
them as dearly as any of the girls. I used to gather them when I was a
child, but I almost never see the blue ones any more, and I don't know
as I ever expected to see a yellow violet again as long as I live. Where
did you get them?"

"In my woods," said the Harvester. "You see I grow several members of
the viola pedata family, bird's foot, snake, and wood violet, and three
of the odorata, English, marsh, and sweet, for our big drug houses. They
use the flowers in making delicate tests for acids and alkalies.
The entire plant, flower, seed, leaf, and root, goes into different
remedies. The beds seed themselves and spread, so I have more than
I need for the chemists, and I sell a few. I don't use the white and
yellow in my business; I just grow them for their beauty. I also sell my
surplus lilies of the valley. Would you like to order some of them for
your house or more violets for to-morrow?"

"Well bless my soul! Do you mean to tell me that lilies of the valley
are medicine?"

The Harvester laughed.

"I grow immense beds of them in the woods on the banks of Loon Lake,"
he said. "They are the convallaris majallis of the drug houses and I
scarcely know what the weak-hearted people would do without them. I use
large quantities in trade, and this season I am selling a few because
people so love them."

"Lilies in medicine; well dear me! Are roses good for our innards too?"

Then the Harvester did laugh.

"I imagine the roses you know go into perfumes mostly," he answered.
"They do make medicine of Canadian rock rose and rose bay, laurel, and
willow. I grow the bushes, but they are not what you would consider
roses."

"I wonder now," said the woman studying the Harvester closely, "if you
are not that queer genius I've heard of, who spends his time hunting and
growing stuff in the woods and people call him the Medicine Man."

"I strongly suspect madam, I am that man," said the Harvester.

"Well bless me!" cried she. "I've always wanted to see you and here when
I do, you look just like anybody else. I thought you'd have long hair,
and be wild-eyed and ferocious. And your talk sounds like out of a book.
Well that beats me!"

"Me too!" said the Harvester, lifting his hat. "You don't want any
lilies to-morrow, then?"

"Yes I do. Medicine or no medicine, I've always liked 'em, and I'm going
to keep on liking them. If you can bring me a good-sized bunch after the
weak-kneed----"

"Weak-hearted," corrected the Harvester.

"Well 'weak-hearted,' then; it's all the same thing. If you've got any
left, as I was saying, you can fetch them to me for the smell."

The Harvester laughed all the way down town. There he went to Doctor
Carey's office, examined a directory, and got the names of all the
numbers where he had sold yellow violets. A few questions when the
doctor came in settled all of them, but the flower scheme was better.
Because the yellow were not so plentiful as the white and blue, next day
he added buttercups and cowslips to his store for the dark girls. When
he had rifled his beds for the last time, after three weeks of almost
daily trips to town, and had paid high prices to small boys he set
searching the adjoining woods until no more flowers could be found, he
drove from the outskirts of the city one day toward the hospital, and as
he stopped, down the street came Doctor Carey frantically waving to him.
As the big car slackened, "Come on David, quick! I've seen her!" cried
the doctor.

The Harvester jumped from the wagon, threw the lines to Belshazzar, and
landed in the panting car.

"For Heaven's sake where? Are you sure?"

The car went speeding down the street. A policeman beckoned and cried
after it.

"It won't do any good to get arrested, Doc," cautioned the Harvester.

"Now right along here," panted Doctor Carey. "Watch both sides sharply.
If I stop you jump out, and tell the blame policemen to get at their
job. The party they are hired to find is right under their noses."

The Harvester began to perspire. "Doc, don't you think you should tell
me? Maybe she is in some store. Maybe I could do better on foot."

"Shut up!" growled the doctor. "I am doing the best I know."

He hurried up the street for blocks and back again, and at last stopped
before a large store and went in. When he returned he drove to the
hospital and together they entered the office. There he turned to the
Harvester.

"It isn't so hard to understand you now, my boy," he said. "Shades of
Diana, but she'll be a beauty when she gets a little more flesh and
colour. She came out of Whitlaw's and walked right to the crossing. I
almost could have touched her, but I didn't notice. Two girls passed
before me, and in hurrying, a tall, dark one knocked off one of your
bunches of yellow violets. She glanced at it and laughed, but let
it lay. Then your girl hesitated stooped and picked it up. The crazy
policeman yelled at me to clear the crossing and it didn't hit me for a
half block how tall and white she was and how dark her eyes were. I was
just thinking about her picking up the flowers, and that it was queer
for her to do it, when like a brick it hit me, THAT'S DAVID'S GIRL! I
tried to turn around, but you know what Main Street is in the middle
of the day. And those idiots of policemen! They ordered me on, and I
couldn't turn for a street car coming, so I called to one of them that
the girl we wanted was down the street, and he looked at me like an
addle-pate and said, 'What girl? Move on or you'll get in a jam here.'
You can use me for a football if I don't go back and smash him. Paid him
five dollars myself less than two weeks ago to keep his eyes open. 'TO
KEEP HIS EYES OPEN!'" panted the doctor, shaking his fist at David. "Yes
sir! 'To keep his eyes open!' And he motioned for things to come along,
and so I lost her too."

"I think we had better go back to the street," said the Harvester.

"Oh, I'd been back and forth along that street for nearly an hour before
I gave up and came here to see if I could find you, and we've hunted it
an hour more! What's the use? She's gone for this time, but by gum, I
saw her! And she was worth seeing!"

"Did she appear ill to you?"

The doctor dropped on a chair and threw out his hands hopelessly.

"This was awful sudden, David," he said. "I was going along as I told
you, and I noticed her stop and thought she had a good head to wait a
second instead of running in before me, and there came those two girls
right under the car from the other side. I only had a glimpse of her as
she stooped for the flowers. I saw a big braid of hair, but I was half a
block away before I got it all connected, and then came the crush in the
street, and I was blocked."

The doctor broke down and wiped his face and expressed his feelings
unrestrainedly.

"Don't!" said the Harvester patiently. "It's no use to feel so badly,
Doc. I know what you would give to have found her for me. I know you did
all you could. I let her escape me. We will find her yet. It's glorious
news that she's in the city. It gives me heart to hear that. Can't you
just remember if she seemed ill?"

The doctor meditated.

"She wasn't the tallest girl I ever saw," he said slowly, "but she was
the tallest girl to be pretty. She had on a white waist and a gray skirt
and black hat. Her eyes and hair were like you said, and she was plain,
white faced, with a hue that might possibly be natural, and it might be
confinement in bad light and air and poor food. She didn't seem sick,
but she isn't well. There is something the matter with her, but it's not
immediate or dangerous. She appeared like a flower that had got a little
moisture and sprouted in a cellar."

"You saw her all right!" said the Harvester, "and I think your diagnosis
is correct too. That's the way she seemed to me. I've thought she needed
sun and air. I told the South Wind so the other day."

"Why you blame fool!" cried the doctor. "Is this thing going to your
head? Say, I forgot! There is something else. I traced her in the store.
She was at the embroidery counter and she bought some silk. If she ever
comes again the clerk is going to hold her and telephone me or get her
address if she has to steal it. Oh, we are getting there! We will have
her pretty soon now. You ought to feel better just to know that she is
in town and that I've seen her."

"I do!" said the Harvester. "Indeed I do!"

"It can't be much longer," said the doctor. "She's got to be located
soon. But those policemen! I wouldn't give a nickel for the lot! I'll
bet she's walked over them for two weeks. If I were you I'd discharge
the bunch. They'd be peacefully asleep if she passed them. If they'd let
me alone, I'd have had her. I could have turned around easily. I've been
in dozens of closer places."

"Don't worry! This can't last much longer. She's of and in the city or
she wouldn't have picked up the flowers. Doc, are you sure they were
mine?"

"Yes. Half the girls have been tricked out in yours the past two weeks.
I can spot them as far as I can see."

"Dear Lord, that's getting close!" said the Harvester intensely. "Seems
as if the violets would tell her."

"Now cut out flowers talking and the South Wind!" ordered the doctor.
"This is business. The violets prove something all right, though. If she
was in the country, she could gather plenty herself. She is working at
sewing in some room in town, either over a store or in a house. If she
hadn't been starved for flowers she never would have stopped for them on
the street. I could see just a flash of hesitation, but she wanted them
too much. David, one bouquet will go in water and be cared for a week.
Man, it's getting close! This does seem like a link."

"Since you say it, possibly I dare agree with you," said the Harvester.

"How near are you through with that canvass of yours?"

"About three fourths."

"Well I'd go on with it. After all we have got to find her ourselves.
Those senile policemen!"

"I am going on with it; you needn't worry about that. But I've got to
change to other flowers. I've stripped the violet beds. There's quite
a crop of berries coming, but they are not ripe yet, and a tragedy to
pick. The pond lilies are just beginning to open by the thousand. The
lake border is blue with sweet-flag that is lovely and the marsh pale
gold with cowslips. The ferns are prime and the woods solid sheets of
every colour of bloom. I believe I'll go ahead with the wild flowers."

"I would too! David, you do feel better, don't you?"

"I certainly do, Doctor. Surely it won't be long now!"

The Harvester was so hopeful that he whistled and sang on the return to
Medicine Woods, and that night for the first time in many days he sat
long over a candlestick, and took a farewell peep into her room before
he went to bed.

The next day he worked with all his might harvesting the last remnants
of early spring herbs, in the dry-room and store-house, and on furniture
and candlesticks.

Then he went back to flower gathering and every day offered bunches of
exquisite wood and field flowers and white and gold water lilies from
door to door.

Three weeks later the Harvester, perceptibly thin, pale, and worried
entered the office. He sank into a chair and groaned wearily.

"Isn't this the bitterest luck!" he cried. "I've finished the town. I've
almost walked off my legs. I've sold flowers by the million, but I've
not had a sight of her."

"It's been almost a tragedy with me," said the doctor gloomily. "I've
killed two dogs and grazed a baby, because I was watching the sidewalks
instead of the street. What are you going to do now?"

"I am going home and bring up the work to the July mark. I am going to
take it easy and rest a few days so I can think more clearly. I don't
know what I'll try next. I've punched up the depot and the policemen
again. When I get something new thought out I'll let you know."

Then he began emptying his pockets of money and heaping it on the table,
small coins, bills, big and little.

"What on earth is that?"

"That," said the Harvester, giving the heap a shove of contempt, "that
is the price of my pride and humiliation. That is what it cost people
who allowed me to cheek my way into their homes and rob them, as one
maid said, for my own purposes. Doc, where on earth does all the money
come from? In almost every house I entered, women had it to waste, in
many cases to throw away. I never saw so much paid for nothing in all my
life. That whole heap is from mushrooms and flowers."

"What are you piling it there for?"

"For your free ward. I don't want a penny of it. I wouldn't keep it, not
if I was starving."

"Why David! You couldn't compel any one to buy. You offered something
they wanted, and they paid you what you asked."

"Yes, and to keep them from buying, and to make the stuff go farther, I
named prices to shame a shark. When I think of that mushroom deal I can
feel my face burn. I've made the search I wanted to, and I am satisfied
that I can't find her that way. I have kept up my work at home between
times. I am not out anything but my time, and it isn't fair to plunder
the city to pay that. Take that cussed money and put it where I'll never
see or hear of it. Do anything you please, except to ask me ever to
profit by a cent. When I wash my hands after touching it for the last
time maybe I'll feel better."

"You are a fanatic!"

"If getting rid of that is being a fanatic, I am proud of the title. You
can't imagine what I've been through!"

"Can't I though?" laughed the doctor. "In work of that kind you get into
every variety of place; and some of it is new to you. Never mind! No one
can contaminate you. It is the law that only a man can degrade himself.
Knowing things will not harm you. Doing them is a different matter. What
you know will be a protection. What you do ruins----if it is wrong. You
are not harmed, you are only disgusted. Think it over, and in a few days
come back and get your money. It is strictly honest. You earned every
cent of it."

"If you ever speak of it again or force it on me I'll take it home and
throw it into the lake."

He went after Betsy and slowly drove to Medicine Woods. Belshazzar,
on the seat beside him, recognized a silent, disappointed master
and whimpered as he rubbed the Harvester's shoulder to attract his
attention.

"This is tough luck, old boy," said the Harvester. "I had such hopes and
I worked so hard. I suffered in the flesh for every hour of it, and I
failed. Oh but I hate the word! If I knew where she is right now, Bel,
I'd give anything I've got. But there's no use to wail and get sorry
for myself. That's against the law of common decency. I'll take a swim,
sleep it off, straighten up the herbs a little, and go at it again, old
fellow; that's a man's way. She's somewhere, and she's got to be found,
no matter what it costs."



CHAPTER VIII. BELSHAZZAR'S RECORD POINT

The Harvester set the neglected cabin in order; then he carefully and
deftly packed all his dried herbs, barks, and roots. Next came carrying
the couch grass, wild alum, and soapwort into the store-room. Then
followed July herbs. He first went to his beds of foxglove, because
the tender leaves of the second year should be stripped from them at
flowering time, and that usually began two weeks earlier; but his bed
lay in a shaded, damp location and the tall bloom stalks were only in
half flower, their pale lavender making an exquisite picture. It paid
to collect those leaves, so the Harvester hastily stripped the amount he
wanted.

Yarrow was beginning to bloom and he gathered as much as he required,
taking the whole plant. That only brought a few cents a pound, but it
was used entire, so the weight made it worth while.

Catnip tops and leaves were also ready. As it grew in the open in dry
soil and the beds had been weeded that spring, he could gather great
arm loads of it with a sickle, but he had to watch the swarming bees. He
left the male fern and mullein until the last for different reasons.

On the damp, cool, rocky hillside, beneath deep shade of big forest
trees, grew the ferns, their long, graceful fronds waving softly. Tree
toads sang on the cool rocks beneath them, chewinks nested under gnarled
roots among them, rose-breasted grosbeaks sang in grape-vines clambering
over the thickets, and Singing Water ran close beside. So the Harvester
left digging these roots until nearly the last, because he so disliked
to disturb the bed. He could not have done it if he had not been forced.
All of the demand for his fern never could be supplied. Of his products
none was more important to the Harvester because this formed the basis
of one of the oldest and most reliable remedies for little children. The
fern had to be gathered with especial care, deteriorated quickly, and no
staple was more subject to adulteration.

So he kept his bed intact, lifted the roots at the proper time,
carefully cleaned without washing, rapidly dried in currents of hot
air, and shipped them in bottles to the trade. He charged and received
fifteen cents a pound, where careless and indifferent workers got ten.

On the banks of Singing Water, at the head of the fern bed, the
Harvester stood under a gray beech tree and looked down the swaying
length of delicate green. He was lean and rapidly bronzing, for he
seldom remembered a head covering because he loved the sweep of the wind
in his hair.

"I hate to touch you," he said. "How I wish she could see you before I
begin. If she did, probably she would say it was a sin, and then I never
could muster courage to do it at all. I'd give a small farm to know
if those violets revived for her. I was crazy to ask Doc if they were
wilted, but I hated to. If they were from the ones I gathered that
morning they should have been all right."

A tree toad dared him to come on; a chipmunk grew saucy as the Harvester
bent to an unloved task. If he stripped the bed as closely as he dared
and not injure it, he could not fill half his orders; so, deftly and
with swift, skilful fingers and an earnest face, he worked. Belshazzar
came down the hill on a rush, nose to earth and began hunting among the
plants. He never could understand why his loved master was so careless
as to go to work before he had pronounced it safe. When the fern bed was
finished, the Harvester took time to make a trip to town, but there
was no word waiting him; so he went to the mullein. It lay on a sunny
hillside beyond the couch grass and joined a few small fields, the only
cleared land of the six hundred acres of Medicine Woods. Over rocks and
little hills and hollows spread the pale, grayish-yellow of the green
leaves, and from five to seven feet arose the flower stems, while
the entire earth between was covered with rosettes of young plants.
Belshazzar went before to give warning if any big rattlers curled in the
sun on the hillside, and after him followed the Harvester cutting leaves
in heaps. That was warm work and he covered his head with a floppy old
straw hat, with wet grass in the crown, and stopped occasionally to
rest.

He loved that yellow-faced hillside. Because so much of his reaping lay
in the shade and commonly his feet sank in dead leaves and damp earth,
the change was a rest. He cheerfully stubbed his toes on rocks, and
endured the heat without complaint. It appeared to him as if a member of
every species of butterfly he knew wavered down the hillside. There were
golden-brown danais, with their black-striped wings, jetty troilus with
an attempt at trailers, big asterias, velvety black with longer trails
and wide bands of yellow dots. Coenia were most numerous of all and to
the Harvester wonderfully attractive in rich, subdued colours with a
wealth of markings and eye spots. Many small moths, with transparent
wings and noses red as blood, flashed past him hunting pollen.
Goldfinches, intent on thistle bloom, wavered through the air trailing
mellow, happy notes behind them, and often a humming-bird visited the
mullein. On the lake wild life splashed and chattered incessantly, and
sometimes the Harvester paused and stood with arms heaped with leaves,
to interpret some unusually appealing note of pain or anger or some very
attractive melody. The red-wings were swarming, the killdeers busy, and
he thought of the Dream Girl and smiled.

"I wonder if she would like this," he mused.

When the mullein leaves were deep on the trays of the dry-house he began
on the bloom and that was a task he loved. Just to lay off the beds in
swaths and follow them, deftly picking the stamens and yellow petals
from the blooms. These he would dry speedily in hot air, bottle, and
send at once to big laboratories. The listed price was seventy-five
cents a pound, but the beautiful golden bottles of the Harvester always
brought more. The work was worth while, and he liked the location and
gathering of this particular crop: for these reasons he always left
it until the last, and then revelled in the gold of sunshine, bird,
butterfly, and flower. Several days were required to harvest the mullein
and during the time the man worked with nimble fingers, while his brain
was intensely occupied with the question of what to do next in his
search for the Girl.

When the work was finished, he went to the deep wood to take a peep at
acres of thrifty ginseng, and he was satisfied as he surveyed the big
bed. Long years he had laboured diligently; soon came the reward. He had
not realized it before, but as he studied the situation he saw that
he either must begin this harvest at once or employ help. If he waited
until September he could not gather one third of the crop alone.

"But the roots will weigh less if I take them now," he argued, "and I
can work at nothing in comfort until I have located her. I will go on
with my search and allow the ginseng to grow that much heavier. What a
picture! It is folly to disturb this now, for I will lose the seed of
every plant I dig, and that is worth almost as much as the root. It is
a question whether I want to furnish the market with seed, and so raise
competition for my bed. I think, be jabbers, that I'll wait for this
harvest until the seed is ripe, and then bury part of a head where I dig
a root, as the Indians did. That's the idea! The more I grow, the more
money; and I may need considerable for her. One thing I'd like to know:
Are these plants cultivated? All the books quote the wild at highest
rates and all I've ever sold was wild. The start grew here naturally.
What I added from the surrounding country was wild, but through and
among it I've sown seed I bought, and I've tended it with every care.
But this is deep wood and wild conditions. I think I have a perfect
right to so label it. I'll ask Doc. And another thing I'll go through
the woods west of Onabasha where I used to find ginseng, and see if I
can get a little and then take the same amount of plants grown here,
and make a test. That way I can discover any difference before I go to
market. This is my gold mine, and that point is mighty important to me,
so I'll go this very day. I used to find it in the woods northeast of
town and on the land Jameson bought, west. Wonder if he lives there yet.
He should have died of pure meanness long ago. I'll drive to the river
and hunt along the bank."

Early the following morning the Harvester went to Onabasha and stopped
at the hospital for news. Finding none, he went through town and several
miles into the country on the other side, to a piece of lowland lying
along the river bank, where he once had found and carried home to reset
a big bed of ginseng. If he could get only a half pound of roots
from there now, they would serve his purpose. He went down the bank,
Belshazzar at his heels, and at last found the place. Many trees had
been cut, but there remained enough for shade; the fields bore the
ragged, unattractive appearance of old. The Harvester smiled grimly
as he remembered that the man who lived there once had charged him for
damage he might do to trees in driving across his woods, and boasted to
his neighbours that a young fool was paying for the privilege of doing
his grubbing. If Jameson had known what the roots he was so anxious to
dispose of brought a pound on the market at that time, he would have
been insane with anger. So the Harvester's eyes were dancing with fun
and a wry grin twisted his lips as he clambered over the banks of
the recently dredged river, and looked at its pitiful condition and
straight, muddy flow.

"Appears to match the remainder of the Jameson property," he said. "I
don't know who he is or where he came from, but he's no farmer. Perhaps
he uses this land to corral the stock he buys until he can sell it
again."

He went down the embankment and began to search for the location where
he formerly had found the ginseng. When he came to the place he stood
amazed, for from seed, roots, and plants he had missed, the growth had
sprung up and spread, so that at a rapid estimate the Harvester thought
it contained at least five pounds, allowing for what it would shrink on
account of being gathered early. He hesitated an instant, and thought
of coming later; but the drive was long and the loss would not amount
to enough to pay for a second trip. About taking it, he never thought
at all. He once had permission from the owner to dig all the shrubs,
bushes, and weeds he desired from that stretch of woods, and had paid
for possible damages that might occur. As he bent to the task there did
come a fleeting thought that the patch was weedless and in unusual shape
for wild stuff. Then, with swift strokes of his light mattock, he lifted
the roots, crammed them into his sack, whistled to Belshazzar, and going
back to the wagon, drove away. Reaching home he washed the ginseng,
and spread it on a tray to dry. The first time he wanted the mattock
he realized that he had left it lying where he had worked. It was an
implement that he had directed a blacksmith to fashion to meet his
requirements. No store contained anything half so useful to him. He had
worked with it for years and it just suited him, so there was nothing to
do but go back. Betsy was too tired to return that day, so he planned
to dig his ginseng with something else, finish his work the following
morning, and get the mattock in the afternoon.

"It's like a knife you've carried for years, or a gun," muttered the
Harvester. "I actually don't know how to get along without it. What made
me so careless I can't imagine. I never before in my life did a trick
like that. I wonder if I hurried a little. I certainly was free to
take it. He always wanted the stuff dug up. Of all the stupid tricks,
Belshazzar, that was the worst. Now Betsy and a half day of wasted time
must pay for my carelessness. Since I have to go, I'll look a little
farther. Maybe there is more. Those woods used to be full of it."

According to this programme, the next afternoon the Harvester again
walked down the embankment of the mourning river and through the ragged
woods to the place where the ginseng had been. He went forward, stepping
lightly, as men of his race had walked the forest for ages, swerving to
avoid boughs, and looking straight ahead. Contrary to his usual custom
of coming to heel in a strange wood, Belshazzar suddenly darted around
the man and took the path they had followed the previous day. The animal
was performing his office in life; he had heard or scented something
unusual. The Harvester knew what that meant. He looked inquiringly at
the dog, glanced around, and then at the earth. Belshazzar proceeded
noiselessly at a rapid pace over the leaves: Suddenly the master saw the
dog stop in a stiff point. Lifting his feet lightly and straining his
eyes before him, the Harvester passed a spice thicket and came in line.

For one second he stood as rigid as Belshazzar. The next his right arm
shot upward full length, and began describing circles, his open
palm heavenward, and into his face leapt a glorified expression of
exultation. Face down in the rifled ginseng bed lay a sobbing girl. Her
frame was long and slender, a thick coil of dark hair; bound her head. A
second more and the Harvester bent and softly patted Belshazzar's head.
The beast broke point and looked up. The man caught the dog's chin in a
caressing grip, again touched his head, moved soundless lips, and waved
toward the prostrate figure. The dog hesitated. The Harvester made the
same motions. Belshazzar softly stepped over the leaves, passed around
the feet of the girl, and paused beside her, nose to earth, softly
sniffing.

In one moment she came swiftly to a sitting posture.

"Oh!" she cried in a spasm of fright.

Belshazzar reached an investigating nose and wagged an eager tail.

"Why you are a nice friendly dog!" said the trembling voice.

He immediately verified the assertion by offering his nose for a kiss.
The girl timidly laid a hand on his head.

"Heaven knows I'm lonely enough to kiss a dog," she said, "but suppose
you belong to the man who stole my ginseng, and then ran away so fast he
forgot his----his piece he digged with."

Belshazzar pressed closer.

"I am just killed, and I don't care whose dog you are," sobbed the girl.

She threw her arms around Belshazzar's neck and laid her white face
against his satiny shoulder. The Harvester could endure no more. He took
a step forward, his face convulsed with pain.

"Please don't!" he begged. "I took your ginseng. I'll bring it back
to-morrow. There wasn't more than twenty-five or thirty dollars' worth.
It doesn't amount to one tear."

The girl arose so quickly, the Harvester could not see how she did it.
With a startled fright on her face, and the dark eyes swimming, she
turned to him in one long look. Words rolled from the lips of the man in
a jumble. Behind the tears there was a dull, expressionless blue in the
girl's eyes and her face was so white that it appeared blank. He began
talking before she could speak, in an effort to secure forgiveness
without condemnation.

"You see, I grow it for a living on land I own, and I've always gathered
all there was in the country and no one cared. There never was enough in
one place to pay, and no other man wanted to spend the time, and so
I've always felt free to take it. Every one knew I did, and no one ever
objected before. Once I paid Henry Jameson for the privilege of cleaning
it from these woods. That was six or seven years ago, and it didn't
occur to me that I wasn't at liberty to dig what has grown since. I'll
bring it back at once, and pay you for the shrinkage from gathering it
too early. There won't be much over six pounds when it's dry. Please,
please don't feel badly. Won't you trust me to return it, and make good
the damage I've done?"

The face of the Harvester was eager and his tones appealing, as he
leaned forward trying to make her understand.

"Certainly!" said the Girl as she bent to pat the dog, while she
dried her eyes under cover of the movement. "Certainly! It can make no
difference!"

But as the Harvester drew a deep breath of relief, she suddenly
straightened to full height and looked straight at him.

"Oh what is the use to tell a pitiful lie!" she cried. "It does make a
difference! It makes all the difference in the world! I need that money!
I need it unspeakably. I owe a debt I must pay. What----what did I
understand you to say ginseng is worth?"

"If you will take a few steps," said the Harvester, "and make yourself
comfortable on this log in the shade, I will tell you all I know about
it."

The girl walked swiftly to the log indicated, seated herself, and
waited. The Harvester followed to a respectful distance.

"I can't tell to an ounce what wet roots would weigh," he said as easily
as he could command his voice to speak with the heart in him beating
wildly, "and of course they lose greatly in drying; but I've handled
enough that I know the weight I carried home will come to six pounds at
the very least. Then you must figure on some loss, because I dug
this before it really was ready. It does not reach full growth until
September, and if it is taken too soon there is a decrease in weight. I
will make that up to you when I return it."

The troubled eyes were gazing on his face intently, and the Harvester
studied them as he talked.

"You would think, then, there would be all of six pounds?

"Yes," said the Harvester, "closer eight. When I replace the shrinkage
there is bound to be over seven."

"And how much did I understand you to say it brought a pound?"

"That all depends," answered he. "If you cure it yourself, and dry it
too much, you lose in weight. If you carry it in a small lot to the
druggists of Onabasha, probably you will not get over five dollars for
it."

"Five?"

It was a startled cry.

"How much did you expect?" asked the Harvester gently.

"Uncle Henry said he thought he could get fifty cents a pound for all I
could find."

"If your Uncle Henry has learned at last that ginseng is a salable
article he should know something about the price also. Will you tell
me what he said, and how you came to think of gathering roots for the
market?"

"There were men talking beneath the trees one Sunday afternoon about old
times and hunting deer, and they spoke of people who made money long ago
gathering roots and barks, and they mentioned one man who lived by it
yet."

"Was his name Langston?"

"Yes, I remember because I liked the name. I was so eager to earn
something, and I can't leave here just now because Aunt Molly is very
ill, so the thought came that possibly I could gather stuff worth money,
after my work was finished. I went out and asked questions. They said
nothing brought enough to make it pay any one, except this ginseng
plant, and the Langston man almost had stripped the country. Then uncle
said he used to get stuff here, and he might have got some of that. I
asked what it was like, so they told me and I hunted until I found that,
and it seemed a quantity to me. Of course I didn't know it had to be
dried. Uncle took a root I dug to a store, and they told him that it
wasn't much used any more, but they would give him fifty cents a pound
for it. What MAKES you think you can get five dollars?"

"With your permission," said the Harvester.

He seated himself on the log, drew from his pocket an old pamphlet,
and spreading it before her, ran a pencil along the line of a list of
schedule prices for common drug roots and herbs. Because he understood,
his eyes were very bright, and his voice a trifle crisp. A latent anger
springing in his breast was a good curb for his emotions. He was closely
acquainted with all of the druggists of Onabasha, and he knew that not
one of them had offered less than standard prices for ginseng.

"The reason I think so," he said gently, "is because growing it is the
largest part of my occupation, and it was a staple with my father before
me. I am David Langston, of whom you heard those men speak. Since I was
a very small boy I have lived by collecting herbs and roots, and I get
more for ginseng than anything else. Very early I tired of hunting other
people's woods for herbs, so I began transplanting them to my own. I
moved that bed out there seven years ago. What you found has grown since
from roots I overlooked and seeds that fell at that time. Now do you
think I am enough of an authority to trust my word on the subject?"

There was not a change of expression on her white face.

"You surely should know," she said wearily, "and you could have no
possible object in deceiving me. Please go on."

"Any country boy or girl can find ginseng, gather, wash, and dry it, and
get five dollars a pound. I can return yours to-morrow and you can cure
and take it to a druggist I will name you, and sell for that. But if you
will allow me to make a suggestion, you can get more. Your roots are now
on the trays of an evaporating house. They will dry to the proper degree
desired by the trade, so that they will not lose an extra ounce in
weight, and if I send them with my stuff to big wholesale houses I deal
with, they will be graded with the finest wild ginseng. It is worth more
than the cultivated and you will get closer eight dollars a pound for it
than five. There is some speculation in it, and the market fluctuates:
but, as a rule, I sell for the highest price the drug brings, and, at
times when the season is very dry, I set my own prices. Shall I return
yours or may I cure and sell it, and bring you the money?"

"How much trouble would that make you?"

"None. The work of digging and washing is already finished. All that
remains is to weigh it and make a memorandum of the amount when I sell.
I should very much like to do it. It would be a comfort to see the money
go into your hands. If you are afraid to trust me, I will give you the
names of several people you can ask concerning me the next time you go
to the city."

She looked at him steadily.

"Never mind that," she said. "But why do you offer to do it for a
stranger? It must be some trouble, no matter how small you represent it
to be."

"Perhaps I am going to pay you eight and sell for ten."

"I don't think you can. Five sounds fabulous to me. I can't believe
that. If you wanted to make money you needn't have told me you took it.
I never would have known. That isn't your reason!"

"Possibly I would like to atone for those tears I caused," said the
Harvester.

"Don't think of that! They are of no consequence to any one. You needn't
do anything for me on that account."

"Don't search for a reason," said the Harvester, in his gentlest tones.
"Forget that feature of the case. Say I'm peculiar, and allow me to do
it because it would be a pleasure. In close two weeks I will bring you
the money. Is it a bargain?"

"Yes, if you care to make it."

"I care very much. We will call that settled."

"I wish I could tell you what it will mean to me," said the Girl.

"If you only would," plead the Harvester.

"I must not burden a stranger with my troubles."

"But if it would make the stranger so happy!"

"That isn't possible. I must face life and bear what it brings me
alone."

"Not unless you choose," said the Harvester. "That is, if you will
pardon me, a narrow view of life. It cuts other people out of the joy of
service. If you can't tell me, would you trust a very lovely and gentle
woman I could bring to you?"

"No more than you. It is my affair; I must work it out myself."

"I am mighty sorry," said the Harvester. "I believe you err in that
decision. Think it over a day or so, and see if two heads are not better
than one. You will realize when this ginseng matter is settled that you
profited by trusting me. The same will hold good along other lines, if
you only can bring yourself to think so. At any rate, try. Telling a
trouble makes it lighter. Sympathy should help, if nothing can be done.
And as for money, I can show you how to earn sums at least worth your
time, if you have nothing else you want to do."

The Girl bent toward him.

"Oh please do tell me!" she cried eagerly. "I've tried and tried to find
some way ever since I have been here, but every one else I have met says
I can't, and nothing seems to be worth anything. If you only would tell
me something I could do!"

"If you will excuse my saying so," said the Harvester, "it appeals to
me that ease, not work, is the thing you require. You appear extremely
worn. Won't you let me help you find a way to a long rest first?"

"Impossible!" cried the Girl. "I know I am white and appear ill, but
truly I never have been sick in all my life. I have been having trouble
and working too much, but I'll be better soon. Believe me, there is no
rest for me now. I must earn the money I owe first."

"There is a way, if you care to take it," said the Harvester. "In my
work I have become very well acquainted with the chief surgeon of the
city hospital. Through him I happen to know that he has a free bed in
a beautiful room, where you could rest until you are perfectly strong
again, and that room is empty just now. When you are well, I will tell
you about the work."

As she arose the Harvester stood, and tall and straight she faced him.

"Impossible!" she said. "It would be brutal to leave my aunt. I cannot
pay to rest in a hospital ward, and I will not accept charity. If you
can put me in the way of earning, even a few cents a day, at anything
I could do outside the work necessary to earn my board here, it would
bring me closer to happiness than anything else on earth."

"What I suggest is not impossible," said the Harvester softly. "If you
will go, inside an hour a sweet and gentle lady will come for you and
take you to ease and perfect rest until you are strong again. I will see
that your aunt is cared for scrupulously. I can't help urging you. It is
a crime to talk of work to a woman so manifestly worn as you are."

"Then we will not speak of it," said the Girl wearily. "It is time for
me to go, anyway. I see you mean to be very kind, and while I don't in
the least understand it, I do hope you feel I am grateful. If half
you say about the ginseng comes true, I can make a payment worth while
before I had hoped to. I have no words to tell you what that will mean
to me."

"If this debt you speak of were paid, could you rest then?"

"I could lie down and give up in peace, and I think I would."

"I think you wouldn't," said the Harvester, "because you wouldn't be
allowed. There are people in these days who make a business of securing
rest for the tired and over weary, and they would come and prevent that
if you tried it. Please let me make another suggestion. If you owe money
to some one you feel needs it and the debt is preying on you, let's pay
it."

He drew a small check-book from his pocket and slipped a pen from a
band.

"If you will name the amount and give me the address, you shall be free
to go to the rest I ask for you inside an hour."

Then slowly from head to foot she looked at him.

"Why?"

"Because your face and attitude clearly indicate that you are over
tired. Believe me, you do yourself wrong if you refuse."

"In what way would changing creditors rest me?"

"I thought perhaps you were owing some one who needed the money. I am
not a rich man, but I have no one save myself to provide for and I have
funds lying idle that I would be glad to use for you. If you make a
point of it, when you are rested, you can repay me."

"My creditor needs the money, but I should prefer owing him rather than
a perfect stranger. What you suggest would help me not at all. I must go
now."

"Very well," said the Harvester. "If you will tell me whom to ask for
and where you live, I will come to see you to-morrow and bring you
some pamphlets. With these and with a little help you soon can earn
any amount a girl is likely to owe. It will require but a little while.
Where can I find you?"

The Girl hesitated and for the first time a hint of colour flushed her
cheek. But courage appeared to be her strong point.

"Do you live in this part of the country?" she asked.

"I live ten miles from here, east of Onabasha," he answered.

"Do you know Henry Jameson?"

"By sight and by reputation."

"Did you ever know anything kind or humane of him?"

"I never did."

"My name is Ruth Jameson. At present I am indebted to him for the only
shelter I have. His wife is ill through overwork and worry, and I am
paying for my bed and what I don't eat, principally, by attempting her
work. It scarcely would be fair to Uncle Henry to say that I do it. I
stagger around as long as I can stand, then I sit through his abuse. He
is a pleasant man. Please don't think I am telling you this to harrow
your sympathy further. The reason I explain is because I am driven. If I
do not, you will misjudge me when I say that I only can see you here.
I understood what you meant when you said Uncle Henry should have known
the price of ginseng if he knew it was for sale. He did. He knew what
he could get for it, and what he meant to pay me. That is one of his
original methods with a woman. If he thought I could earn anything worth
while, he would allow me, if I killed myself doing it; and then he would
take the money by force if necessary. So I can meet you here only. I can
earn just what I may in secret. He buys cattle and horses and is away
from home much of the day, and when Aunt Molly is comfortable I can have
a few hours."

"I understand," said the Harvester. "But this is an added hardship.
Why do you remain? Why subject yourself to force and work too heavy for
you?"

"Because his is the only roof on earth where I feel I can pay for all I
get. I don't care to discuss it, I only want you to say you understand,
if I ask you to bring the pamphlets here and tell me how I can earn
money."

"I do," said the Harvester earnestly, although his heart was hot in
protest. "You may be very sure that I will not misjudge you. Shall I
come at two o'clock to-morrow, Miss Jameson?"

"If you will be so kind."

The Harvester stepped aside and she passed him and crossing the rifled
ginseng patch went toward a low brown farmhouse lying in an unkept
garden, beside a ragged highway. The man sat on the log she had vacated,
held his head between his hands and tried to think, but he could not for
big waves of joy that swept over him when he realized that at last he
had found her, had spoken with her, and had arranged a meeting for the
morrow.

"Belshazzar," he said softly, "I wish I could leave you to protect
her. Every day you prove to me that I need you, but Heaven knows her
necessity is greater. Bel, she makes my heart ache until it feels like
jelly. There seems to be just one thing to do. Get that fool debt paid
like lightning, and lift her out of here quicker than that. Now, we will
go and see Doc, and call off the watch-dogs of the law. Ahead of them,
aren't we, Belshazzar? There is a better day coming; we feel it in our
bones, don't we, old partner?"

The Harvester started through the woods on a rush, and as the exercise
warmed his heart, he grew wonderfully glad. At last he had found her.
Uncertainty was over. If ever a girl needed a home and care he thought
she did. He was so jubilant that he felt like crying aloud, shouting for
joy, but by and by the years of sober repression made their weight felt,
so he climbed into the wagon and politely requested Betsy to make her
best time to Onabasha. Betsy had been asked to make haste so frequently
of late that she at first almost doubted the sanity of her master, the
law of whose life, until recently, had been to take his time. Now he
appeared to be in haste every day. She had become so accustomed to
being urged to hurry that she almost had developed a gait; so at the
Harvester's suggestion she did her level best to Onabasha and the
hospital, where she loved to nose Belshazzar and rest near the watering
tap under a big tree.

The Harvester went down the hall and into the office on the run, and his
face appeared like a materialized embodiment of living joy. Doctor Carey
turned at his approach and then bounded half way across the room, his
hands outstretched.

"You've found her, David!"

The Harvester grabbed the hand of his friend and stood pumping it up and
down while he gulped at the lump in his throat, and big tears squeezed
from his eyes, but he could only nod his proud head.

"Found her!" exulted Doctor Carey. "Really found her! Well that's great!
Sit down and tell me, boy! Is she sick, as we feared? Did you only see
her or did you get to talk with her?"

"Well sir," said the Harvester, choking back his emotions, "you remember
that ginseng I told you about getting on the old Jameson place last
night. To-day, I learned I'd lost that hand-made mattock I use most, and
I went back for it, and there she was."

"In the country?"

"Yes sir!"

"Well why didn't we think of it before?"

"I suppose first we would have had to satisfy ourselves that she wasn't
in town, anyway."

"Sure! That would be the logical way to go at it! And so you found her?"

"Yes sir, I found her! Just Belshazzar and I! I was going along on my
way to the place, and he ran past me and made a stiff point, and when I
came up, there she was!"

"There she was?"

"Yes sir; there she was!"

They shook hands again.

"Then of course you spoke to her."

"Yes I spoke to her."

"Were you pleased?"

"With her speech and manner?----yes. But, Doc, if ever a woman needed
everything on earth!"

"Well did you get any kind of a start made?"

"I couldn't do so very much. I had to go a little slow for fear of
frightening her, but I tried to get her to come here and she won't until
a debt she owes is paid, and she's in no condition to work."

"Got any idea how much it is?"

"No, but it can't be any large sum. I tried to offer to pay it, but she
had no hesitation in telling me she preferred owing a man she knew to a
stranger."

"Well if she is so particular, how did she come to tell you first thing
that she was in debt?"

The Harvester explained.

"Oh I see!" said the doctor. "Well you'll have to baby her along with
the idea that she is earning money and pay her double until you get that
off her mind, and while you are at it, put in your best licks, my boy;
perk right up and court her like a house afire. Women like it. All of
them do. They glory in feeling that a man is crazy about them."

"Well I'm insane enough over her," said the Harvester, "but I'd hate
like the nation for her to know it. Seems as if a woman couldn't respect
such an addle-pate as I am lately."

"Don't you worry about that," advised the doctor. "Just you make love to
her. Go at it in the good old-fashioned way."

"But maybe the 'good old-fashioned way' isn't my way."

"What's the difference whose way it is, if it wins?"

"But Kipling says: 'Each man makes love his own way!'"

"I seem to have heard you mention that name be fore," said the doctor.
"Do you regard him as an authority?"

"I do!" said the Harvester. "Especially when he advises me after my own
heart and reason. Miss Jameson is not a silly girl. She's a woman,
and twenty-four at least. I don't want her to care for a trick or a
pretence. I do want her to love me. Not that I am worth her attention,
but because she needs some strong man fearfully, and I am ready and more
'willing' than the original Barkis. But, like him, I have to let her
know it in my way, and court her according to the promptings of my
heart."

"You deceive yourself!" said the doctor flatly. "That's all bosh! Your
tongue says it for the satisfaction of your ears, and it does sound
well. You will court her according to your ideas of the conventions, as
you understand them, and strictly in accordance with what you consider
the respect due her. If you had followed the thing you call the
'promptings of your heart,' you would have picked her up by main force
and brought her to my best ward, instead of merely suggesting it and
giving up when she said no. If you had followed your heart, you would
have choked the name and amount out of her and paid that devilish debt.
You walk away in a case like that, and then have the nerve to come here
and prate to me about following your heart. I'll wager my last dollar
your heart is sore because you were not allowed to help her; but on the
proposition that you followed its promptings I wouldn't stake a penny.
That's all tommy-rot!"

"It is," agreed the Harvester. "Utter! But what can a man do?"

"I don't know what you can do! I'd have paid that debt and brought her
to the hospital."

"I'll go and ask Mrs. Carey about your courtship. I want her help on
this, anyway. I can pick up Miss Jameson and bring her here if any man
can, but she is nursing a sick woman who depends solely on her for care.
She is above average size, and she has a very decided mind of her own.
I don't think you would use force and do what you think best for her, if
you were in my place. You would wait until you understood the situation
better, and knew that what you did was for the best, ultimately."

"I don't know whether I would or not. One thing is sure: I'm mighty glad
you have found her. May I tell my wife?"

"Please do! And ask her if I may depend on her if I need a woman's help.
Now I'll call off the valiant police and go home and take a good, sound
sleep. Haven't had many since I first saw her."

So Betsy trotted down the valley, up the embankment, crossed the
railroad, over the levee across Singing Water, and up the hill to the
cabin. As they passed it, the Harvester jumped from the wagon, tossed
the hitching strap to Belshazzar, and entered. He walked straight to her
door, unlocked it, and uncovering, went inside. Softly he passed from
piece to piece of the furniture he had made for her, and then surveyed
the walls and floor.

"It isn't half good enough," he said, "but it will have to answer until
I can do better. Surely she will know I tried and care for that, anyway.
I wonder how long it will take me to get her here. Oh, if I only could
know she was comfortable and happy! Happy! She doesn't appear as if she
ever had heard that word. Well this will be a good place to teach her.
I've always enjoyed myself here. I'm going to have faith that I can win
her and make her happy also. When I go to the stable to do my work for
the night if I could know she was in this cabin and glad of it, and if
I could hear her down here singing like a happy care-free girl, I'd
scarcely be able to endure the joy of it."



CHAPTER IX. THE HARVESTER GOES COURTING

"She is on Henry Jameson's farm, four miles west of Onabasha," said the
Harvester, as he opened his eyes next morning, and laid a caressing hand
on Belshazzar's head. "At two o'clock we are going to see her, and we
are going to prolong the visit to the ultimate limit, so we should make
things count here before we start."

He worked in a manner that accomplished much. There seemed no end to
his energy that morning. Despatching the usual routine, he gathered
the herbs that were ready, spread them on the shelves of the dry-house,
found time to do several things in the cabin, and polish a piece of
furniture before he ate his lunch and hitched Betsy to the wagon.
He also had recovered his voice, and talked almost incessantly as he
worked. When it neared time to start he dressed carefully. He stood
before his bookcase and selected several pamphlets published by the
Department of Agriculture. He went to his beds and gathered a large
arm load of plants. Then he was ready to make his first trip to see the
Dream Girl, but it never occurred to him that he was going courting.

He had decided fully that there would be no use to try to make love to
a girl manifestly so ill and in trouble. The first thing, it appeared to
him, was to dispel the depression, improve the health, and then do the
love making. So, in the most business-like manner possible and without
a shade of embarrassment, the Harvester took his herbs and books and
started for the Jameson woods. At times as he drove along he espied
something that he used growing beside the road and stopped to secure a
specimen.

He came down the river bank and reached the ginseng bed at half-past
one. He was purposely early. He laid down his books and plants,
and rolled the log on which she sat the day before to a more shaded
location, where a big tree would serve for a back rest. He pulled away
brush and windfalls, heaped dry brown leaves, and tramped them down
for her feet. Then he laid the books on the log, the arm load of plants
beside them, and went to the river to wash his soiled hands.

Belshazzar's short bark told him the Girl was coming, and between the
trees he saw the dog race to meet her and she bent to stroke his
head. She wore the same dress and appeared even paler and thinner. The
Harvester hurried up the bank, wiping his hands on his handkerchief.

"Glad to see you!" he greeted her casually. "I've fixed you a seat
with a back rest to-day. Don't be frightened at the stack of herbs. You
needn't gather all of those. They are only suggestions. They are just
common roadside plants that have some medicinal value and are worth
collecting. Please try my davenport."

"Thank you!" she said as she dropped on the log and leaned her head
against the tree. It appeared as if her eyes closed a few seconds in
spite of her, and while they were shut the Harvester looked steadily
and intently on a face of exquisite beauty, but so marred by pallor and
lines of care that search was required to recognize just how handsome
she was, and if he had not seen her in perfection in the dream the
Harvester might have missed glorious possibilities. To bring back that
vision would be a task worth while was his thought. With the first faint
quiver of an eyelash the Harvester took a few steps and bent over a
plant, and as he did so the Girl's eyes followed him.

He appeared so tall and strong, so bronzed by summer sun and wind, his
face so keen and intense, that swift fear caught her heart. Why was he
there? Why should he take so much trouble for her? With difficulty she
restrained herself from springing up and running away. Turning with
the plant in his hand the Harvester saw the panic in her eyes, and
it troubled his heart. For an instant he was bewildered, then he
understood.

"I don't want you to work when you are not able," he said in his most
matter-of-fact voice, "but if you still think that you are, I'll be very
glad. I need help just now, more than I can tell you, and there seem to
be so few people who can be trusted. Gathering stuff for drugs is really
very serious business. You see, I've a reputation to sustain with some
of the biggest laboratories in the country, not to mention the fact
that I sometimes try compounding a new remedy for some common complaint
myself. I rather take pride in the fact that my stuff goes in so fresh
and clean that I always get anywhere from three to ten cents a pound
above the listed prices for it. I want that money, but I want an
unbroken record for doing a job right and being square and careful, much
more."

He thought the appearance of fright was fading, and a tinge of interest
taking its place. She was looking straight at him, and as he talked he
could see her summoning her tired forces to understand and follow him,
so he continued:

"One would think that as medicines are required in cases of life and
death, collectors would use extreme caution, but some of them are
criminally careless. It's a common thing to gather almost any fern
for male fern; to throw in anything that will increase weight, to wash
imperfectly, and commit many other sins that lie with the collector;
beyond that I don't like to think. I suppose there are men who
deliberately adulterate pure stuff to make it go farther, but when it
comes to drugs, I scarcely can speak of it calmly. I like to do a thing
right. I raise most of my plants, bushes, and herbs. I gather exactly
in season, wash carefully if water dare be used, clean them otherwise
if not, and dry them by a hot air system in an evaporator I built
purposely. Each package I put up is pure stuff, clean, properly dried,
and fresh. If I caught any man in the act of adulterating any of it I'm
afraid he would get hurt badly--and usually I am a peaceable man. I
am explaining this to show how very careful you must be to keep things
separate and collect the right plants if you are going to sell stuff to
me. I am extremely particular."

The Girl was leaning toward him, watching his face, and hers was slowly
changing. She was deeply interested, much impressed, and more at ease.
When the Harvester saw he had talked her into confidence he crossed
the leaves, and sitting on the log beside her, picked up the books and
opened one.

"Oh I will be careful," said the Girl. "If you will trust me to collect
for you, I will undertake only what I am sure I know, and I'll do
exactly as you tell me."

"There are a dozen things that bring a price ranging from three to
fifteen cents a pound, that are in season just now. I suppose you would
like to begin on some common, easy things, that will bring the most
money."

Without a breath of hesitation she answered, "I will commence on
whatever you are short of and need most to have."

The heart of the Harvester gave a leap that almost choked him, for
he was vividly conscious of a broken shoe she was hiding beneath her
skirts. He wanted to say "thank you," but he was afraid to, so he turned
the leaves of the book.

"I am working just now on mullein," he said.

"Oh I know mullein," she cried, with almost a hint of animation in her
voice. "The tall, yellow flower stem rising from a circle of green felt
leaves!"

"Good!" said the Harvester. "What a pretty way to describe it! Do you
know any more plants?"

"Only a few! I had a high-school course in botany, but it was all about
flower and leaf formation, nothing at all of what anything was good for.
I also learned a few, drawing them for leather and embroidery designs."

"Look here!" cried the Harvester. "I came with an arm load of herbs and
expected to tell you all about foxglove, mullein, yarrow, jimson,
purple thorn apple, blessed thistle, hemlock, hoarhound, lobelia, and
everything in season now; but if you already have a profession, why do
you attempt a new one? Why don't you go on drawing? I never saw anything
so stupid as most of the designs from nature for book covers and
decorations, leather work and pottery. They are the same old subjects
worked over and over. If you can draw enough to make original copies,
I can furnish you with flowers, vines, birds, and insects, new, unused,
and of exquisite beauty, for every month in the year. I've looked into
the matter a little, because I am rather handy with a knife, and I carve
candlesticks from suitable pieces of wood. I always have trouble getting
my designs copied; securing something new and unusual, never! If you can
draw just well enough to reproduce what you see, gathering drugs is too
slow and tiresome. What you want to do is to reproduce the subjects I
will bring, and I'll buy what I want in my work, and sell the remainder
at the arts and crafts stores for you. Or I can find out what they pay
for such designs at potteries and ceramic factories. You have no time to
spend on herbs, when you are in the woods, if you can draw."

"I am surely in the woods," said the Girl, "and I know I can copy
correctly. I often made designs for embroidery and leather for the shop
mother and I worked for in Chicago."

"Won't they buy them of you now?"

"Undoubtedly."

"Do they pay anything worth while?"

"I don't know how their prices compare with others. One place was all I
worked for. I think they pay what is fair."

"We will find out," said the Harvester promptly.

"I----I don't think you need waste the time," faltered the Girl. "I had
better gather the plants for a while at least."

"Collecting crude drug material is not easy," said the Harvester.
"Drawing may not be either, but at least you could sit while you work,
and it should bring you more money. Besides, I very much want a moth
copied for a candlestick I am carving. Won't you draw that for me? I
have some pupae cases and the moths will be out any day now. If I'd
bring you one, wouldn't you just make a copy?"

The Girl gripped her hands together and stared straight ahead of her for
a second, then she turned to him.

"I'd like to," she said, "but I have nothing to work with. In Chicago
they furnished my material at the shop and I drew the design and was
paid for the pattern. I didn't know there would be a chance for anything
like that here. I haven't even proper pencils."

"Then the way for you to do this is to strip the first mullein plants
you see of the petals. I will pay you seventy-five cents a pound for
them. By the time you get a few pounds I can have material you need
for drawing here and you can go to work on whatever flowers, vines, and
things you can find in the woods, with no thanks to any one."

"I can't see that," said the Girl. "It would appear to me that I would
be under more obligations than I could repay, and to a stranger."

"I figure it this way," said the Harvester, watching from the corner
of his eye. "I can sell at good prices all the mullein flowers I can
secure. You collect for me, I buy them. You can use drawing tools; I
get them for you, and you pay me with the mullein or out of the ginseng
money I owe you. You already have that coming, and it's just as much
yours as it will be ten days from now. You needn't hesitate a second
about drawing on it, because I am in a hurry for the moth pattern.
I find time to carve only at night, you see. As for being under
obligations to a stranger, in the first place all the debt would be on
my side. I'd get the drugs and the pattern I want; and, in the second
place, I positively and emphatically refuse to be a stranger. It would
be so much better to be mutual helpers and friends of the kind worth
having; and the sooner we begin, the sooner we can work together to
good advantage. Get that stranger idea out of your head right now, and
replace it with thoughts of a new friend, who is willing"--the Harvester
detected panic in her eyes and ended casually--"to enter a partnership
that will be of benefit to both of us. Partners can't be strangers, you
know," he finished.

"I don't know what to think," said the Girl.

"Never bother your head with thinking," advised the Harvester with an
air of large wisdom. "It is unprofitable and very tiring. Any one can
see that you are too weary now. Don't dream of such a foolish thing as
thinking. Don't worry over motives and obligations. Say to yourself,
'I'll enter this partnership and if it brings me anything good, I'm that
much ahead. If it fails, I have lost nothing.' That's the way to look at
it."

Then before she could answer he continued: "Now I want all the mullein
bloom I can get. You'll see the yellow heads everywhere. Strip the
petals and bring them here, and I'll come for them every day. They must
go on the trays as fresh as possible. On your part, we will make out the
order now."

He took a pencil and notebook from his pocket.

"You want drawing pencils and brushes; how many, what make and size?"

The Girl hesitated for a moment as if struggling to decide what to do;
then she named the articles.

"And paper?"

He wrote that down, and asked if there was more.

"I think," he said, "that I can get this order filled in Onabasha. The
art stores should keep these things. And shouldn't you have water-colour
paper and some paint?"

Then there was a flash across the white face.

"Oh if I only could!" she cried. "All my life I have been crazy for a
box of colour, but I never could afford it, and of course, I can't now.
But if this splendid plan works, and I can earn what I owe, then maybe I
can."

"Well this 'splendid plan' is going to 'work,' don't you bother about
that," said the Harvester. "It has begun working right now. Don't worry
a minute. After things have gone wrong for a certain length of time,
they always veer and go right a while as compensation. Don't think of
anything save that you are at the turning. Since it is all settled that
we are to be partners, would you name me the figures of the debt that
is worrying you? Don't, if you mind. I just thought perhaps we could get
along better if I knew. Is it----say five hundred dollars?"

"Oh dear no!" cried the Girl in a panic. "I never could face that! It is
not quite one hundred, and that seems big as a mountain to me."

"Forget it!" he cried. "The ginseng will pay more than half; that I
know. I can bring you the cash in a little over a week."

She started to speak, hesitated, and at last turned to him.

"Would you mind," she said, "if I asked you to keep it until I can find
a way to go to town? It's too far to walk and I don't know how to send
it. Would I dare put it in a letter?"

"Never!" said the Harvester. "You want a draft. That money will be too
precious to run any risks. I'll bring it to you and you can write a note
and explain to whom you want it paid, and I'll take it to the bank for
you and get your draft. Then you can write a letter, and half your worry
will be over safely."

"It must be done in a sure way," said the Girl. "If I knew I had the
money to pay that much on what I owe, and then lost it, I simply could
not endure it. I would lie down and give up as Aunt Molly has."

"Forget that too!" said the Harvester. "Wipe out all the past that has
pain in it. The future is going to be beautifully bright. That little
bird on the bush there just told me so, and you are always safe when you
trust the feathered folk. If you are going to live in the country
any length of time, you must know them, and they will become a great
comfort. Are you planning to be here long?"

"I have no plans. After what I saw Chicago do to my mother I would
rather finish life in the open than return to the city. It is horrible
here, but at least I'm not hungry, and not afraid----all the time."

"Gracious Heaven!" cried the Harvester. "Do you mean to say that you are
afraid any part of the time? Would you kindly tell me of whom, and why?"

"You should know without being told that when a woman born and reared
in a city, and all her life confined there, steps into the woods for the
first time, she's bound to be afraid. The last few weeks constitute my
entire experience with the country, and I'm in mortal fear that snakes
will drop from trees and bushes or spring from the ground. Some places I
think I'm sinking, and whenever a bush catches my skirts it seems as
if something dreadful is reaching up for me; there is a possibility of
horror lurking behind every tree and----"

"Stop!" cried the Harvester. "I can't endure it! Do you mean to tell me
that you are afraid here and now?"

She met his eyes squarely.

"Yes," she said. "It almost makes me ill to sit on this log without
taking a stick and poking all around it first. Every minute I think
something is going to strike me in the back or drop on my head."

The Harvester grew very white beneath the tan, and that developed a
nice, sickly green complexion for him.

"Am I part of your tortures?" he asked tersely.

"Why shouldn't you be?" she answered. "What do I know of you or your
motives or why you are here?"

"I have had no experience with the atmosphere that breeds such an
attitude in a girl."

"That is a thing for which to thank Heaven. Undoubtedly it is gracious
to you. My life has been different."

"Yet in mortal terror of the woods, and probably equal fear of me, you
are here and asking for work that will keep you here."

"I would go through fire and flood for the money I owe. After that debt
is paid----"

She threw out her hands in a hopeless gesture. The Harvester drew forth
a roll of bills and tossed them into her lap.

"For the love of mercy take what you need and pay it," he said. "Then
get a floor under your feet, and try, I beg of you, try to force
yourself to have confidence in me, until I do something that gives you
the least reason for distrusting me."

She picked up the money and gave it a contemptuous whirl that landed it
at his feet.

"What greater cause of distrust could I have by any possibility than
just that?" she asked.

The Harvester arose hastily, and taking several steps, he stood with
folded arms, his back turned. The Girl sat watching him with wide eyes,
the dull blue plain in their dusky depths. When he did not speak, she
grew restless. At last she slowly arose and circling him looked into his
face. It was convulsed with a struggle in which love and patience fought
for supremacy over honest anger. As he saw her so close, his lips drew
apart, and his breath came deeply, but he did not speak. He merely stood
and looked at her, and looked; and she gazed at him as if fascinated,
but uncomprehending.

"Ruth!"

The call came roaring up the hill. The Girl shivered and became paler.

"Is that your uncle?" asked the Harvester.

She nodded.

"Will you come to-morrow for your drawing materials?"

"Yes."

"Will you try to believe that there is absolutely nothing, either
underfoot or overhead, that will harm you?"

"Yes."

"Will you try to think that I am not a menace to public safety, and that
I would do much to help you, merely because I would be glad to be of
service?"

"Yes."

"Will you try to cultivate the idea that there is nothing in all this
world that would hurt you purposely?"

"Ruth!" came a splitting scream in gruff man-tones, keyed in deep anger.

"That SOUNDS like it!" said the Girl, and catching up her skirts she ran
through the woods, taking a different route toward the house.

The Harvester sat on the log and tried to think; but there are times
when the numbed brain refuses to work, so he really sat and suffered.
Belshazzar whimpered and licked his hands, and at last the man arose
and went with the dog to the wagon. As they came through Onabasha, Betsy
turned at the hospital corner, but the Harvester pulled her around and
drove toward the country. Not until they crossed the railroad did he
lift his head and then he drew a deep breath as if starved for pure air
and spoke. "Not to-day Betsy! I can't face my friends just now. Someway
I am making an awful fist of things. Everything I do is wrong. She no
more trusts me than you would a rattlesnake, Belshazzar; and from all
appearance she takes me to be almost as deadly. What must have been her
experiences in life to ingrain fear and distrust in her soul at that
rate? I always knew I was not handsome, but I never before regarded my
appearance as alarming. And I 'fixed up,' too!"

The Harvester grinned a queer little twist of a grin that pulled and
distorted his strained face. "Might as well have gone with a week's
beard, a soiled shirt, and a leer! And I've always been as decent as I
knew! What's the reward for clean living anyway, if the girl you love
strikes you like that?"

Belshazzar reached across and kissed him. The Harvester put his arm
around the dog. In the man's disappointment and heart hunger he leaned
his head against the beast and said, "I've always got you to love and
protect me, anyway, Belshazzar. Maybe the man who said a dog was a man's
best friend was right. You always trusted me, didn't you Bel? And you
never regretted it but once, and that wasn't my fault. I never did it!
If I did, I'm getting good and well paid for it. I'd rather be kicked
until all the ribs of one side are broken, Bel, than to swallow the dose
she just handed me. I tell you it was bitter, lad! What am I going to
do? Can't you help me, Bel?"

Belshazzar quivered in anxiety to offer the comfort he could not speak.

"Of course you are right! You always are, Bel!" said the Harvester. "I
know what you are trying to tell me. Sure enough, she didn't have any
dream. I am afraid she had the bitterest reality. She hasn't been loving
a vision of me, working and searching for me, and I don't mean to her
what she does to me. Of course I see that I must be patient and bide my
time. If there is anything in 'like begetting like' she is bound to care
for me some day, for I love her past all expression, and for all she
feels I might as well save my breath. But she has got to awake some day,
Bel. She can make up her mind to that. She can't see 'why.' Over and
over! I wonder what she would think if I'd up and tell her 'why' with no
frills. She will drive me to it some day, then probably the shock will
finish her. I wonder if Doc was only fooling or if he really would do
what he said. It might wake her up, anyway, but I'm dubious as to the
result. How Uncle Henry can roar! He sounded like a fog horn. I'd love
to try my muscle on a man like that. No wonder she is afraid of him, if
she is of me. Afraid! Well of all things I ever did expect, Belshazzar,
that is the limit."



CHAPTER X. THE CHIME OF THE BLUE BELLS

The Harvester finished his evening work and went to examine the cocoons.
Many of the moths had emerged and flown, but the luna cases remained
in the bottom of the box. As he stood looking at them one moved and he
smiled.

"I'd give something if you would come out and be ready to work on by
to-morrow afternoon," he said. "Possibly you would so interest her that
she would forget her fear of me. I'd like mighty well to take you
along, because she might care for you, and I do need the pattern for my
candlestick. Believe I'll lay you in a warmer place."

The first thing the next morning the Harvester looked and found the open
cocoon and the wet moth clinging by its feet to a twig he had placed for
it.

"Luck is with me!" he exulted. "I'll carry you to her and be mighty
careful what I say, and maybe she will forget about the fear."

All the forenoon he cut and spread boneset, saffron, and hemlock on the
trays to dry. At noon he put on a fresh outfit, ate a hasty lunch, and
drove to Onabasha. He carried the moth in a box, and as he started he
picked up a rake. He went to an art store and bought the pencils and
paper she had ordered. He wanted to purchase everything he saw for her,
but he was fast learning a lesson of deep caution. If he took more than
she ordered, she would worry over paying, and if he refused to
accept money, she would put that everlasting "why" at him again. The
water-colour paper and paint he could not forego. He could make a desire
to have the moth  explain those, he thought.

Then he went to a furniture store and bought several articles, and
forgetting his law against haste, he drove Betsy full speed to the
river. He was rather heavily ladened as he went up the bank, and it
was only one o'clock. There was an hour. He rolled away the log, raked
together and removed the leaves to the ground. He tramped the earth
level and spread a large cheap porch rug. On this he opened and placed
a little folding table and chair. On the table he spread the pencils,
paper, colour box and brushes, and went to the river to fill the water
cup. Then he sat on the log he had rolled to one side and waited. After
two hours he arose and crept as close the house as he could through the
woods, but he could not secure a glimpse of the Girl. He went back and
waited an hour more, and then undid his work and removed it. When he
came to the moth his face was very grim as he lifted the twig and helped
the beautiful creature to climb on a limb. "You'll be ready to fly in
a few hours," he said. "If I keep you in a box you will ruin your wings
and be no suitable subject, and put you in a cyanide jar I will not. I
am hurt too badly myself. I wonder if what Doc said was the right way!
It's certainly a temptation."

Then he went home; and again Betsy veered at the hospital, and once more
the Harvester explained to her that he did not want to see the doctor.
That evening and the following forenoon were difficult, but the
Harvester lived through them, and in the afternoon went back to the
woods, spread his rug, and set up the table. Only one streak of luck
brightened the gloom in his heart. A yellow emperor had emerged in the
night, and now occupied the place of yesterday's luna. She never need
know it was not the one he wanted, and it would make an excuse for the
colour box.

He was watching intently and saw her coming a long way off. He noticed
that she looked neither right nor left, but came straight as if walking
a bridge. As she reached the place she glanced hastily around and then
at him. The Harvester forgave her everything as he saw the look of
relief with which she stepped upon the carpet. Then she turned to him.

"I won't have to ask 'why' this time," she said. "I know that you did it
because I was baby enough to tell what a coward I am. I'm sure you
can't afford it, and I know you shouldn't have done it, but oh, what a
comfort! If you will promise never to do any such expensive, foolish,
kind thing again, I'll say thank you this time. I couldn't come
yesterday, because Aunt Molly was worse and Uncle Henry was at home all
day."

"I supposed it was something like that," said the Harvester.

She advanced and handed him the roll of bills.

"I had a feeling you would be reckless," she said. "I saw it in your
face, so I came back as soon as I could steal away, and sure enough,
there lay your money and the books and everything. I hid them in the
thicket, so they will be all right. I've almost prayed it wouldn't rain.
I didn't dare carry them to the house. Please take the money. I haven't
time to argue about it or strength, but of course I can't possibly use
it unless I earn it. I'm so anxious to see the pencils and paper."

The Harvester thrust the money into his pocket. The Girl went to the
table, opened and spread the paper, and took out the pencils.

"Is my subject in here?" she touched the colour box.

"No, the other."

"Is it alive? May I open it?"

"We will be very careful at first," said the Harvester. "It only left
its case in the night and may fly. When the weather is so warm the wings
develop rapidly. Perhaps if I remove the lid----"

He took off the cover, exposing a big moth, its lovely, pale yellow
wings, flecked with heliotrope, outspread as it clung to a twig in the
box. The Girl leaned forward.

"What is it?" she asked.

"One of the big night moths that emerge and fly a few hours in June."

"Is this what you want for your candlestick?"

"If I can't do better. There is one other I prefer, but it may not come
at a time that you can get it right."

"What do you mean by 'right'?"

"So that you can copy it before it wants to fly."

"Why don't you chloroform and pin it until I am ready?"

"I am not in the business of killing and impaling exquisite creatures
like that."

"Do you mean that if I can't draw it when it is just right you will let
it go?"

"I do."

"Why?"

"I told you why."

"I know you said you were not in the business, but why wouldn't you take
only one you really wanted to use?"

"I would be afraid," replied the Harvester.

"Afraid? You!"

"I must have a mighty good reason before I kill," said the man. "I
cannot give life; I have no right to take it away. I will let my
statement stand. I am afraid."

"Of what please?"

"An indefinable something that follows me and makes me suffer if I am
wantonly cruel."

"Is there any particular pose in which you want this bird placed?"

"Allow me to present you to the yellow emperor, known in the books as
eagles imperialis," he said. "I want him as he clings naturally and life
size."

She took up a pencil.

"If you don't mind," said the Harvester, "would you draw on this other
paper? I very much want the colour, also, and you can use it on this.
I brought a box along, and I'll get you water. I had it all ready
yesterday."

"Did you have this same moth?"

"No, I had another."

"Did you have the one you wanted most?"

"Yes----but it's no difference."

"And you let it go because I was not here?"

"No. It went on account of exquisite beauty. If kept in confinement it
would struggle and break its wings. You see, that one was a delicate
green, where this is yellow, plain pale blue green, with a lavender rib
here, and long curled trailers edged with pale yellow, and eye spots
rimmed with red and black."

As the Harvester talked he indicated the points of difference with a
pencil he had picked up; now he laid it down and retreated beyond the
limits of the rug.

"I see," said the Girl. "And this is colour?"

She touched the box.

"A few colours, rather," said the Harvester. "I selected enough to fill
the box, with the help of the clerk who sold them to me. If they are not
right, I have permission to return and exchange them for anything you
want."

With eager fingers she opened the box, and bent over it a face filled
with interest.

"Oh how I've always wanted this! I scarcely can wait to try it. I do
hope I can have it for my very own. Was it quite expensive?"

"No. Very cheap!" said the Harvester. "The paper isn't worth mentioning.
The little, empty tin box was only a few cents, and the paints differ
according to colour. Some appear to be more than others. I was surprised
that the outfit was so inexpensive."

A skeptical little smile wavered on the Girl's face as she drew her
slender fingers across the trays of bright colour.

"If one dared accept your word, you really would be a comfort," she
said, as she resolutely closed the box, pushed it away, and picked up a
pencil.

"If you will take the trouble to inquire at the banks, post office,
express office, hospital or of any druggist in Onabasha, you will
find that my word is exactly as good as my money, and taken quite as
readily."

"I didn't say I doubted you. I have no right to do that until I feel
you deceive me. What I said was 'dared accept,' which means I must not,
because I have no right. But you make one wonder what you would do if
you were coaxed and asked for things and led by insinuations."

"I can tell you that," said the Harvester. "It would depend altogether
on who wanted anything of me and what they asked. If you would undertake
to coax and insinuate, you never would get it done, because I'd see what
you needed and have it at hand before you had time."

The Girl looked at him wonderingly.

"Now don't spring your recurrent 'why' on me," said the Harvester. "I'll
tell you 'why' some of these days. Just now answer me this question: Do
you want me to remain here or leave until you finish? Which way would
you be least afraid?"

"I am not at all afraid on the rug and with my work," she said. "If you
want to hunt ginseng go by all means."

"I don't want to hunt anything," said the Harvester. "But if you are
more comfortable with me away, I'll be glad to go. I'll leave the dog
with you."

He gave a short whistle and Belshazzar came bounding to him. The
Harvester stepped to the Girl's side, and dropping on one knee, he drew
his hand across the rug close to her skirts.

"Right here, Belshazzar," he said. "Watch! You are on guard, Bel."

"Well of all names for a dog!" exclaimed the Girl. "Why did you select
that?"

"My mother named my first dog Belshazzar, and taught me why; so each of
the three I've owned since have been christened the same. It means 'to
protect' and that is the office all of them perform; this one especially
has filled it admirably. Once I failed him, but he never has gone back
on me. You see he is not a particle afraid of me. Every step I take, he
is at my heels."

"So was Bill Sikes' dog, if I remember."

The Harvester laughed.

"Bel," he said, "if you could speak you'd say that was an ugly one,
wouldn't you?"

The dog sprang up and kissed the face of the man and rubbed a loving
head against his breast.

"Thank you!" said the Harvester. "Now lie down and protect this woman as
carefully as you ever watched in your life. And incidentally, Bel,
tell her that she can't exterminate me more than once a day, and the
performance is accomplished for the present. I refuse to be a willing
sacrifice. 'So was Bill Sikes' dog!' What do you think of that, Bel?"

The Harvester arose and turned to go.

"What if this thing attempts to fly?" she asked.

"Your pardon," said the Harvester. "If the emperor moves, slide the lid
over the box a few seconds, until he settles and clings quietly again,
and then slowly draw it away. If you are careful not to jar the table
heavily he will not go for hours yet."

Again he turned.

"If there is no danger, why do you leave the dog?"

"For company," said the Harvester. "I thought you would prefer an animal
you are not afraid of to a man you are. But let me tell you there is no
necessity for either. I know a woman who goes alone and unafraid through
every foot of woods in this part of the country. She has climbed, crept,
and waded, and she tells me she never saw but two venomous snakes this
side of Michigan. Nothing ever dropped on her or sprang at her. She
feels as secure in the woods as she does at home."

"Isn't she afraid of snakes?"

"She dislikes snakes, but she is not afraid or she would not risk
encountering them daily."

"Do you ever find any?"

"Harmless little ones, often. That is, Bel does. He is always nosing for
them, because he understands that I work in the earth. I think I have
encountered three dangerous ones in my life. I will guarantee you will
not find one in these woods. They are too open and too much cleared."

"Then why leave the dog?"

"I thought," said the Harvester patiently, "that your uncle might have
turned in some of his cattle, or if pigs came here the dog could chase
them away."

She looked at him with utter panic in her face.

"I am far more afraid of a cow than a snake!" she cried. "It is so much
bigger!"

"How did you ever come into these woods alone far enough to find the
ginseng?" asked the Harvester. "Answer me that!"

"I wore Uncle Henry's top boots and carried a rake, and I suffered
tortures," she replied.

"But you hunted until you found what you wanted, and came again to keep
watch on it?"

"I was driven--simply forced. There's no use to discuss it!"

"Well thank the Lord for one thing," said the Harvester. "You didn't
appear half so terrified at the sight of me as you did at the mere
mention of a cow. I have risen inestimably in my own self-respect.
Belshazzar, you may pursue the elusive chipmunk. I am going to guard
this woman myself, and please, kind fates, send a ferocious cow this
way, in order that I may prove my valour."

The Girl's face flushed slightly, and she could not restrain a laugh.
That was all the Harvester hoped for and more. He went beyond the edge
of the rug and sat on the leaves under a tree. She bent over her work
and only bird and insect notes and occasionally Belshazzar's excited
bark broke the silence. The Harvester stretched on the ground, his eyes
feasting on the Girl. Intensely he watched every movement. If a squirrel
barked she gave a nervous start, so precipitate it seemed as if it must
hurt. If a windfall came rattling down she appeared ready to fly in
headlong terror in any direction. At last she dropped her pencil and
looked at him helplessly.

"What is it?" he asked.

"The silence and these awful crashes when one doesn't know what is
coming," she said.

"Will it bother you if I talk? Perhaps the sound of my voice will help?"

"I am accustomed to working when people talk, and it will be a comfort.
I may be able to follow you, and that will prevent me from thinking.
There are dreadful things in my mind when they are not driven out.
Please talk! Tell me about the herbs you gathered this morning."

The Harvester gave the Girl one long look as she bent over her work. He
was vividly conscious of the graceful curves of her little figure, the
coil of dark, silky hair, softly waving around her temples and neck,
and when her eyes turned in his direction he knew that it was only the
white, drawn face that restrained him. He was almost forced to tell her
how he loved and longed for her; about the home he had prepared; of
a thousand personal interests. Instead, he took a firm grip and said
casually, "Foxglove harvest is over. This plant has to be taken when the
leaves are in second year growth and at bloom time. I have stripped my
mullein beds of both leaves and flowers. I finished a week ago. Beyond
lies a stretch of Parnassus grass that made me think of you, it was so
white and delicate. I want you to see it. It will be lovely in a few
weeks more."

"You never had seen me a week ago."

"Oh hadn't I?" said the Harvester. "Well maybe I dreamed about you then.
I am a great dreamer. Once I had a dream that may interest you some
day, after you've overcome your fear of me. Now this bed of which I was
speaking is a picture in September. You must arrange to drive home with
me and see it then."

"For what do you sell foxglove and mullein?"

"Foxglove for heart trouble, and mullein for catarrh. I get ten cents a
pound for foxglove leaves and five for mullein and from seventy-five to
a dollar for flowers of the latter, depending on how well I preserve the
colour in drying them. They must be sealed in bottles and handled with
extreme care."

"Then if I wasn't too childish to be out picking them, I could be
earning seventy-five cents a pound for mullein blooms?"

"Yes," said the Harvester, "but until you learned the trick of stripping
them rapidly you scarcely could gather what would weigh two pounds a
day, when dried. Not to mention the fact that you would have to stand
and work mostly in hot sunshine, because mullein likes open roads and
fields and sunny hills. Now you can sit securely in the shade, and in
two hours you can make me a pattern of that moth, for which I would pay
a designer of the arts and crafts shop five dollars, so of course you
shall have the same."

"Oh no!" she cried in swift panic. "You were charged too much! It isn't
worth a dollar, even!"

"On the contrary the candlestick on which I shall use it will be
invaluable when I finish it, and five is very little for the cream of my
design. I paid just right. You can earn the same for all you can do.
If you can embroider linen, they pay good prices for that, too and wood
carving, metal work, or leather things. May I see how you are coming
on?"

"Please do," she said.

The Harvester sprang up and looked over the Girl's shoulder. He could
not suppress an exclamation of delight.

"Perfect!" he cried. "You can surpass their best drafting at the shop!
Your fortune is made. Any time you want to go to Onabasha you can make
enough to pay your board, dress you well, and save something every week.
You must leave here as soon as you can manage it. When can you go?"

"I don't know," she said wearily. "I'd hate to tell you how full
of aches I am. I could not work much just now, if I had the best
opportunities in the world. I must grow stronger."

"You should not work at anything until you are well," he said. "It is a
crime against nature to drive yourself. Why will you not allow----"

"Do you really think, with a little practice, I can draw designs that
will sell?"

The Harvester picked up the sheet. The work was delicate and exact. He
could see no way to improve it.

"You know it will sell," he said gently, "because you already have sold
such work."

"But not for the prices you offer."

"The prices I name are going to be for NEW, ORIGINAL DESIGNS. I've got a
thousand in my head, that old Mother Nature shows me in the woods and on
the water every day."

"But those are yours; I can't take them."

"You must," said the Harvester. "I only see and recognize studies; I
can't materialize them, and until they are drawn, no one can profit by
them. In this partnership we revolutionize decorative art. There are
actually birds besides fat robins and nondescript swallows. The crane
and heron do not monopolize the water. Wild rose and golden-rod are not
the only flowers. The other day I was gathering lobelia. The seeds
are used in tonic preparations. It has an upright stem with flowers
scattered along it. In itself it is not much, but close beside it always
grows its cousin, tall bell-flower. As the name indicates, the flowers
are bell shape and I can't begin to describe their grace, beauty, and
delicate blue colour. They ring my strongest call to worship. My work
keeps me in the woods so much I remain there for my religion also.
Whenever I find these flowers I always pause for a little service of my
own that begins by reciting these lines:

     "'Neath cloistered boughs, each floral bell that swingeth
          And tolls its perfume on the passing air,
     Makes Sabbath in the fields, and ever ringeth
          A call to prayer."


"Beautiful!" said the Girl.

"It's mighty convenient," explained the Harvester. "By my method, you
see, you don't have to wait for your day and hour of worship. Anywhere
the blue bell rings its call it is Sunday in the woods and in your
heart. After I recite that, I pray my prayer."

"Go on!" said the Girl. "This is no place to stop."

"It is always one and the same prayer, and there are only two lines of
it," said the Harvester. "It runs this way---- Let me take your pencil
and I will write it for you."

He bent over her shoulder, and traced these lines on a scrap of the
wrapping paper:

               "Almighty Evolver of the Universe:
          Help me to keep my soul and body clean,
     And at all times to do unto others as I would be done by.
                         Amen."


The Girl took the slip and sat studying it; then she raised her eyes to
his face curiously, but with a tinge of awe in them.

"I can see you standing over a blue, bell-shaped flower reciting those
exquisite lines and praying this wonderful prayer," she said. "Yesterday
you allowed the moth you were willing to pay five dollars for a drawing
of, to go, because you wouldn't risk breaking its wings. Why you are
more like a woman!"

A red stream crimsoned the Harvester's face.

"Well heretofore I have been considered strictly masculine," he said.
"To appreciate beauty or to try to be just commonly decent is not
exclusively feminine. You must remember there are painters, poets,
musicians, workers in art along almost any line you could mention, and
no one calls them feminine, but there is one good thing if I am. You
need no longer fear me. If you should see me, muck covered, grubbing in
the earth or on a raft washing roots in the lake, you would not consider
me like a woman."

"Would it be any discredit if I did? I think not. I merely meant that
most men would not see or hear the blue bell at all----and as for the
poem and prayer! If the woods make a man with such fibre in his soul, I
must learn them if they half kill me."

"You harp on death. Try to forget the word."

"I have faced it for months, and seen it do its grinding worst very
recently to the only thing on earth I loved or that loved me. I have no
desire to forget! Tell me more about the plants."

"Forgive me," said the Harvester gently. "Just now I am collecting
catnip for the infant and nervous people, hoarhound for colds and
dyspepsia, boneset heads and flowers for the same purpose. There is a
heavy head of white bloom with wonderful lacy leaves, called yarrow. I
take the entire plant for a tonic and blessed thistle leaves and flowers
for the same purpose."

"That must be what I need," interrupted the Girl. "Half the time I
believe I have a little fever, but I couldn't have dyspepsia, because I
never want anything to eat; perhaps the tonic would make me hungry."

"Promise me you will tell that to the doctor who comes to see your aunt,
and take what he gives you."

"No doctor comes to see my aunt. She is merely playing lazy to get out
of work. There is nothing the matter with her."

"Then why----"

"My uncle says that. Really, she could not stand and walk across a room
alone. She is simply worn out."

"I shall report the case," said the Harvester instantly.

"You better not!" said the Girl. "There must be a mistake about you
knowing my uncle. Tell me more of the flowers."

The Harvester drew a deep breath and continued:

"These I just have named I take at bloom time; next month come purple
thorn apple, jimson weed, and hemlock."

"Isn't that poison?"

"Half the stuff I handle is."

"Aren't you afraid?"

"Terribly," said the Harvester in laughing voice. "But I want the money,
the sick folk need the medicine, and I drink water."

The Girl laughed also.

"Look here!" said the Harvester. "Why not tell me just as closely as
you can about your aunt, and let me fix something for her; or if you are
afraid to trust me, let me have my friend of whom I spoke yesterday."

"Perhaps I am not so much afraid as I was," said the Girl. "I wish I
could! How could I explain where I got it and I wonder if she would take
it."

"Give it to her without any explanation," said the Harvester. "Tell her
it will make her stronger and she must use it. Tell me exactly how she
is, and I will fix up some harmless remedies that may help, and can do
no harm."

"She simply has been neglected, overworked, and abused until she has
lain down, turned her face to the wall, and given up hope. I think it is
too late. I think the end will come soon. But I wish you would try. I'll
gladly pay----"

"Don't!" said the Harvester. "Not for things that grow in the woods and
that I prepare. Don't think of money every minute."

"I must," she said with forced restraint. "It is the price of life.
Without it one suffers----horribly----as I know. What other plants do
you gather?"

"Saffron," answered the Harvester. "A beautiful thing! You must see it.
Tall, round stems, lacy, delicate leaves, big heads of bright yellow
bloom, touched with colour so dark it appears black--one of the
loveliest plants that grows. You should see my big bed of it in a week
or two more. It makes a picture."

The words recalled him to the Girl. He turned to study her. He forgot
his commission and chafed at conventions that prevented his doing what
he saw was required so urgently. Fearing she would notice, he gazed away
through the forest and tried to think, to plan.

"You are not making noise enough," she said.

So absorbed was the Harvester he scarcely heard her. In an attempt to
obey he began to whistle softly. A tiny goldfinch in a nest of thistle
down and plant fibre in the branching of a bush ten feet above him stuck
her head over the brim and inquired, "P'tseet?" "Pt'see!" answer the
Harvester. That began the duet. Before the question had been asked and
answered a half dozen times a catbird intruded its voice and hearing a
reply came through the bushes to investigate. A wren followed and became
very saucy. From----one could not see where, came a vireo, and almost at
the same time a chewink had something to say.

Instantly the Harvester answered. Then a blue jay came chattering to
ascertain what all the fuss was about, and the Harvester carried on
a conversation that called up the remainder of the feathered tribe. A
brilliant cardinal came tearing through the thicket, his beady black
eyes snapping, and demanded to know if any one were harming his mate,
brooding under a wild grape leaf in a scrub elm on the river embankment.
A brown thrush silently slipped like a snake between shrubs and trees,
and catching the universal excitement, began to flirt his tail and utter
a weird, whistling cry.

With one eye on the bird, and the other on the Girl sitting in amazed
silence, the Harvester began working for effect. He lay quietly, but in
turn he answered a dozen birds so accurately they thought their mates
were calling, and closer and closer they came. An oriole in orange and
black heard his challenge, and flew up the river bank, answering
at steady intervals for quite a time before it was visible, and in
resorting to the last notes he could think of a quail whistled "Bob
White" and a shitepoke, skulking along the river bank, stopped and
cried, "Cowk, cowk!"

At his limit of calls the Harvester changed his notes and whistled and
cried bits of bird talk in tone with every mellow accent and inflection
he could manage. Gradually the excitement subsided, the birds flew and
tilted closer, turned their sleek heads, peered with bright eyes, and
ventured on and on until the very bravest, the wren and the jay, were
almost in touch. Then, tired of hunting, Belshazzar came racing and the
little feathered people scattered in precipitate flight.

"How do you like that kind of a noise?" inquired the Harvester.

The Girl drew a deep breath.

"Of course you know that was the most exquisite sight I ever saw," she
said. "I never shall forget it. I did not think there were that many
different birds in the whole world. Of all the gaudy colours! And they
came so close you could have reached out and touched them."

"Yes," said the Harvester calmly. "Birds are never afraid of me. At
Medicine Woods, when I call them like that, many, most of them, in fact,
eat from my hand. If you ever have looked at me enough to notice bulgy
pockets, they are full of wheat. These birds are strangers, but I'll
wager you that in a week I can make them take food from me. Of course,
my own birds know me, because they are around every day. It is much
easier to tame them in winter, when the snow has fallen and food is
scarce, but it only takes a little while to win a bird's confidence at
any season."

"Birds don't know what there is to be afraid of," she said.

"Your pardon," said the Harvester, "but I am familiar with them, and
that is not correct. They have more to fear than human beings. No one is
going to kill you merely to see if he can shoot straight enough to hit.
Your life is not in danger because you have magnificent hair that some
woman would like for an ornament. You will not be stricken out in a
flash because there are a few bits of meat on your frame some one
wants to eat. No one will set a seductive trap for you, and, if you are
tempted to enter it, shut you from freedom and natural diet, in a cage
so small you can't turn around without touching bars. You are in a
secure and free position compared with the birds. I also have observed
that they know guns, many forms of traps, and all of them decide by the
mere manner of a man's passing through the woods whether he is a friend
or an enemy. Birds know more than many people realize. They do not
always correctly estimate gun range, they are foolishly venturesome
at times when they want food, but they know many more things than most
people give them credit for understanding. The greatest trouble with the
birds is they are too willing to trust us and be friendly, so they are
often deceived."

"That sounds as if you were right," said the Girl.

"I am of the woods, so I know I am," answered the Harvester.

"Will you look at this now?"

He examined the drawing closely.

"Where did you learn?" he inquired.

"My mother. She was educated to her finger tips. She drew, painted,
played beautifully, sang well, and she had read almost all the best
books. Besides what I learned at high school she taught me all I know.
Her embroidery always brought higher prices than mine, try as I might. I
never saw any one else make such a dainty, accurate little stitch as she
could."

"If this is not perfect, I don't know how to criticise it. I can and
will use it in my work. But I have one luna cocoon remaining and I would
give ten dollars for such a drawing of the moth before it flies. It may
open to-night or not for several days. If your aunt should be worse
and you cannot come to-morrow and the moth emerges, is there any way in
which I could send it to you?"

"What could I do with it?"

"I thought perhaps you could take a piece of paper and the pencils with
you, and secure an outline in your room. It need not be worked up with
all the detail in this. Merely a skeleton sketch would do. Could I leave
it at the house or send it with some one?"

"No! Oh no!" she cried. "Leave it here. Put it in a box in the bushes
where I hid the books. What are you going to do with these things?"

"Hide them in the thicket and scatter leaves over them."

"What if it rains?"

"I have thought of that. I brought a few yards of oilcloth to-day and
they will be safe and dry if it pours."

"Good!" she said. "Then if the moth comes out you bring it, and if I
am not here, put it under the cloth and I will run up some time in the
afternoon. But if I were you, I would not spread the rug until you know
if I can remain. I have to steal every minute I am away, and any day
uncle takes a notion to stay at home I dare not come."

"Try to come to-morrow. I am going to bring some medicine for your
aunt."

"Put it under the cloth if I am not here; but I will come if I can. I
must go now; I have been away far too long."

The Harvester picked up one of the drug pamphlets, laid the drawing
inside it, and placed it with his other books. Then he drew out his
pocket book and laid a five-dollar bill on the table and began folding
up the chair and putting away the things. The Girl looked at the money
with eager eyes.

"Is that honestly what you would pay at the arts and crafts place?"

"It is the customary price for my patterns."

"And are you sure this is as good?"

"I can bring you some I have paid that for, and let you see for yourself
that it is better."

"I wish you would!" she cried eagerly. "I need that money, and I would
like to have it dearly, if I really have earned it, but I can't touch it
if I have not."

"Won't you accept my word?"

"No. I will see the other drawings first, and if I think mine are as
good, I will be glad to take the money to-morrow."

"What if you can't come?"

"Put them under the oilcloth. I watch all the time and I think Uncle
Henry has trained even the boys so they don't play in the river on
his land. I never see a soul here; the woods, house, and everything is
desolate until he comes home and then it is like----" she paused.

"I'll say it for you," said the Harvester promptly. "Then it is like
hell."

"At its worst," supplemented the Girl. Taking pencils and a sheet of
paper she went swiftly through the woods. Before she left the shelter
of the trees, the Harvester saw her busy her hands with the front of
her dress, and he knew that she was concealing the drawing material. The
colour box was left, and he said things as he put it with the chair and
table, covered them with the rug and oilcloth, and heaped on a layer of
leaves.

Then he drove to the city and Betsy turned at the hospital corner
with no interference. He could face his friend that day. Despite
all discouragements he felt reassured. He was progressing. Means of
communication had been established. If she did not come, he could leave
a note and tell her if the moth had not emerged and how sorry he was to
have missed seeing her.

"Hello, lover!" cried Doctor Carey as the Harvester entered the office.
"Are you married yet?"

"No. But I'm going to be," said the Harvester with confidence.

"Have you asked her?"

"No. We are getting acquainted. She is too close to trouble, too ill,
and too worried over a sick relative for me to intrude myself; it would
be brutal, but it's a temptation. Doc, is there any way to compel a man
to provide medical care for his wife?"

"Can he afford it?"

"Amply. Anything! Worth thousands in land and nobody knows what in
money. It's Henry Jameson."

"The meanest man I ever knew. If he has a wife it's a marvel she has
survived this long. Won't he provide for her?"

"I suppose he thinks he has when she has a bed to lie on and a roof to
cover her. He won't supply food she can eat and medicine. He says she is
lazy."

"What do you think?"

"I quote Miss Jameson. She says her aunt is slowly dying from overwork
and neglect."

"David, doesn't it seem pretty good, when you say 'Miss Jameson'?"

"Loveliest sound on earth, except the remainder of it."

"What's that?"

"Ruth!"

"Jove! That is a beautiful name. Ruth Langston. It will go well, won't
it?"

"Music that the birds, insects, Singing Water, the trees, and the breeze
can't ever equal. I'm holding on with all my might, but it's tough, Doc.
She's in such a dreadful place and position, and she needs so much. She
is sick. Can't you give me a prescription for each of them?"

"You just bet I can," said the doctor, "if you can engineer their taking
them."

"I suppose you'd hold their noses and pour stuff down them."

"I would if necessary."

"Well, it is."

"All right----I'll fix something, and you see that they use it."

"I can try," said the Harvester.

"Try! Pah! You aren't half a man!"

"That's a half more than being a woman, anyway."

"She called you feminine, did she?" cried the doctor, dancing and
laughing. "She ought to see you harvesting skunk cabbage and blue flag
or when you are angry enough."

The doctor left the room and it was a half hour before he returned.

"Try that on them according to directions," he said, handing over a
couple of bottles.

"Thank you!" said the Harvester, "I will!"

"That sounds manly enough."

"Oh pother! It's not that I'm not a man, or a laggard in love; but I'd
like to know what you'd do to a girl dumb with grief over the recent
loss of her mother, who was her only relative worth counting, sick from
God knows what exposure and privation, and now a dying relative on her
hands. What could you do?"

"I'd marry her and pick her out of it!"

"I wouldn't have her, if she'd leave a sick woman for me!"

"I wouldn't either. She's got to stick it out until her aunt grows
better, and then I'll go out there and show you how to court a girl."

"I guess not! You keep the girl you did court, courted, and you'll have
your hands full. How does that appear to you?"

The Harvester opened the pamphlet he carried and held up the drawing of
the moth.

The doctor turned to the light.

"Good work!" he cried. "Did she do that?"

"She did. In a little over an hour."

"Fine! She should have a chance."

"She is going to. She is going to have all the opportunity that is
coming to her."

"Good for you, David! Any time I can help!"

The Harvester replaced the sketch and went to the wagon; but he left
Belshazzar in charge, and visited the largest dry goods store in
Onabasha, where he held a conference with the floor walker. When he came
out he carried a heaping load of boxes of every size and shape, with a
label on each. He drove to Medicine Woods singing and whistling.

"She didn't want me to go, Belshazzar!" he chuckled to the dog. "She was
more afraid of a cow than she was of me. I made some headway to-day, old
boy. She doesn't seem to have a ray of an idea what I am there for, but
she is going to trust me soon now; that is written in the books. Oh I
hope she will be there to-morrow, and the luna will be out. Got half a
notion to take the case and lay it in the warmest place I can find.
But if it comes out and she isn't there, I'll be sorry. Better trust to
luck."

The Harvester stabled Betsy, fed the stock, and visited with the birds.
After supper he took his purchases and entered her room. He opened the
drawers of the chest he had made, and selecting the labelled boxes he
laid them in. But not a package did he open. Then he arose and radiated
conceit of himself.

"I'll wager she will like those," he commented proudly, "because Kane
promised me fairly that he would have the right things put up for a girl
the size of the clerk I selected for him, and exactly what Ruth should
have. That girl was slenderer and not quite so tall, but he said
everything was made long on purpose. Now what else should I get?"

He turned to the dressing table and taking a notebook from his pocket
made this list:

     Rugs for bed and bath room.
     Mattresses, pillows and bedding,
     Dresses for all occasions.
     All kinds of shoes and overshoes.


"There are gloves, too!" exclaimed the Harvester. "She has to have some,
but how am I going to know what is right? Oh, but she needs shoes!
High, low, slippers, everything! I wonder what that clerk wears. I don't
believe shoes would be comfortable without being fitted, or at least the
proper size. I wonder what kind of dresses she likes. I hope she's fond
of white. A woman always appears loveliest in that. Maybe I'd better buy
what I'm sure of and let her select the dresses. But I'd love to have
this room crammed with girl-fixings when she comes. Doesn't seem as
if she ever has had any little luxuries. I can't miss it on anything a
woman uses. Let me think!"

Slowly he wrote again:

          Parasols.
          Fans.
          Veils.
          Hats.


"I never can get them! I think that will keep me busy for a few days,"
said the Harvester as he closed the door softly, and went to look at
the pupae cases. Then he carved on the vine of the candlestick for her
dressing table; with one arm around Belshazzar, re-read the story of
John Muir's dog, went into the lake, and to bed. Just as he was becoming
unconscious the beast lifted an inquiring head and gazed at the man.

"More 'fraid of cow," the Harvester was muttering in a sleepy chuckle.



CHAPTER XI. DEMONSTRATED COURTSHIP

When the Harvester saw the Girl coming toward the woods, he spread the
rug, opened and placed the table and chair, laid out the colour box, and
another containing the last luna.

"Did the green one come out?" she asked, touching the box lightly.

"It did!" said the Harvester proudly, as if he were responsible for the
performance. "It is an omen! It means that I am to have my long-coveted
pattern for my best candlestick. It also clearly indicates that the
gods of luck are with me for the day, and I get my way about everything.
There won't be the least use in your asking 'why' or interposing
objections. This is my clean sweep. I shall be fearfully dictatorial and
you must submit, because the fates have pointed out that they favour
me to-day, and if you go contrary to their decrees you will have a bad
time."

The Girl's smile was a little wan. She sank on a chair and picked up a
pencil.

"Lay that down!" cried the Harvester. "You haven't had permission from
the Dictator to begin drawing. You are to sit and rest a long time."

"Please may I speak?" asked the Girl.

The Harvester grew foolishly happy. Was she really going to play the
game? Of course he had hoped, but it was a hope without any foundation.

"You may," he said soberly.

"I am afraid that if you don't allow me to draw the moth at once, I'll
never get it done. I dislike to mention it on your good day, but Aunt
Molly is very restless. I got a neighbour's little girl to watch her and
call me if I'm wanted. It's quite certain that I must go soon, so if you
would like the moth----"

"When luck is coming your way, never hurry it! You always upset the bowl
if you grow greedy and crowd. If it is a gamble whether I get this moth,
I'll take the chance; but I won't change my foreordained programme for
this afternoon. First, you are to sit still ten minutes, shut your eyes,
and rest. I can't sing, but I can whistle, and I'm going to entertain
you so you won't feel alone. Ready now!"

The Girl leaned her elbows on the table, closed her eyes, and pressed
her slender white hands over them.

"Please don't call the birds," she said. "I can't rest if you do. It was
so exciting trying to see all of them and guess what they were saying."

"No," said the Harvester gently. "This ten minutes is for relaxation,
you know. You ease every muscle, sink limply on your chair, lean on the
table, let go all over, and don't think. Just listen to me. I assure you
it's going to be perfectly lovely."

Watching intently he saw the strained muscles relaxing at his suggestion
and caught the smile over the last words as he slid into a soft whistle.
It was an easy, slow, old-fashioned tune, carrying along gently, with
neither heights nor depths, just monotonous, sleepy, soothing notes,
that went on and on with a little ripple of change at times, only to
return to the theme, until at last the Girl lifted her head.

"It's away past ten minutes," she said, "but that was a real rest.
Truly, I am better prepared for work."

"Broke the rule, too!" said the Harvester. "It was, for me to say when
time was up. Can't you allow me to have my way for ten minutes?"

"I am so anxious to see and draw this moth," she answered. "And first of
all you promised to bring the drawings you have been using."

"Now where does my programme come in?" inquired the Harvester. "You are
spoiling everything, and I refuse to have my lucky day interfered with;
therefore we will ignore the suggestion until we arrive at the place
where it is proper. Next thing is refreshments."

He arose and coming over cleared the table. Then he spread on it a paper
tray cloth with a gay border, and going into the thicket brought out
a box and a big bucket containing a jug packed in ice. The Girl's eyes
widened. She reached down, caught up a piece, and holding it to drip a
second started to put it in her mouth.

"Drop that!" commanded the Harvester. "That's a very unhealthful
proceeding. Wait a minute."

From one end of the box he produced a tin of wafers and from the other
a plate. Then he dug into the ice and lifted several different varieties
of chilled fruit. From the jug he poured a combination that he made of
the juices of oranges, pineapples, and lemons. He set the glass, rapidly
frosting in the heat, and the fruit before the Girl.

"Now!" he said.

For one instant she stared at the table. Then she looked at him and in
the depths of her dark eyes was an appeal he never forgot.

"I made that drink myself, so it's all right," he assured her. "There's
a pretty stiff touch of pineapple in it, and it cuts the cobwebs on a
hot day. Please try it!"

"I can't!" cried the Girl with a half-sob. "Think of Aunt Molly!"

"Are you fond of her?"

"No. I never saw her until a few weeks ago. Since then I've seen nothing
save her poor, tired back. She lies in a heap facing the wall. But if
she could have things like these, she needn't suffer. And if my mother
could have had them she would be living to-day. Oh Man, I can't touch
this."

"I see," said the Harvester.

He reached over, picked up the glass, and poured its contents into the
jug. He repacked the fruit and closed the wafer box. Then he made a trip
to the thicket and came out putting something into his pocket.

"Come on!" he said. "We are going to the house."

She stared at him.

"I simply don't dare."

"Then I will go alone," said the Harvester, picking up the bucket and
starting.

The Girl followed him.

"Uncle Henry may come any minute," she urged.

"Well if he comes and acts unpleasantly, he will get what he richly
deserves."

"And he will make me pay for it afterward."

"Oh no he won't!" said the Harvester, "because I'll look out for that.
This is my lucky day. He isn't going to come."

When he reached the back door he opened it and stepped inside. Of all
the barren places of crude, disheartening ugliness the Harvester ever
had seen, that was the worst.

"I want a glass and a spoon," he said.

The Girl brought them.

"Where is she?"

"In the next room."

At the sound of their voices a small girl came to the kitchen door.

"How do you do?" inquired the Harvester. "Is Mrs. Jameson asleep?"

"I don't know," answered the child. "She just lies there."

The Harvester gave her the glass. "Please fill that with water," he
said. Then he picked up the bucket and went into the front room. When
the child came with the water he took a bottle from his pocket, filled
the spoon, and handed it to her.

"Hold that steadily," he said.

Then he slid his strong hands under the light frame and turned the face
of the faded little creature toward him.

"I am a Medicine Man, Mrs. Jameson," he said casually. "I heard you were
sick and I came to see if a little of this stuff wouldn't brace you up.
Open your lips."

He held out the spoon and the amazed woman swallowed the contents before
she realized what she was doing. Then the Harvester ran a hand under
her shoulders and lifting her gently he tossed her pillow with the other
hand.

"You are a light little body, just like my mother," he commented. "Now I
have something else sick people sometimes enjoy."

He held the fruit juice to her lips as he slightly raised her on the
pillow. Her trembling fingers lifted and closed around the sparkling
glass.

"Oh it's cool!" she gasped.

"It is," said the Harvester, "and sour! I think you can taste it. Try!"

She drank so greedily he drew away the glass and urged caution, but the
shaking fingers clung to him and the wavering voice begged for more.

"In a minute," said the Harvester gently. But the fevered woman would
not wait. She drank the cooling liquid until she could take no more.
Then she watched him fill a small pitcher and pack it in a part of the
ice and lay some fruit around it.

"Who, Ruth?" she panted.

"A Medicine Man who heard about you."

"What will Henry say?"

"He won't know," explained the Girl, smoothing the hot forehead. "I'll
put it in the cupboard, and slip it to you while he is out of the room.
It will make you strong and well."

"I don't want to be strong and well and suffer it all over again. I want
to rest. Give me more of the cool drink. Give me all I want, then I'll
go to sleep."

"It's wonderful," said the Girl. "That's more than I've heard her talk
since I came. She is much stronger. Please let her have it."

The Harvester assented. He gave the child some of the fruit, and told
her to sit beside the bed and hold the drink when it was asked for. She
agreed to be very careful and watchful. Then he picked up the bucket,
and followed by the Girl, returned to the woods.

"Now we have to begin all over again," he said, as she seated herself at
the table. "Because of the walk in the heat, this time the programme is
a little different."

He replaced the wafer box and opened it, filled the glass, and heaped
the cold fruit.

"Your aunt is going to have a refreshing sleep now," he said, "and
your mind can be free about her for an hour or two. I am very sure your
mother would not want you deprived of anything because she missed it, so
you are to enjoy this, if you care for it. At least try a sample."

The Girl lifted the glass to her lips with a trembling hand.

"I'm like Aunt Molly," she said; "I wish I could drink all I could
swallow, and then lie down and go to sleep forever. I suppose this is
what they have in Heaven."

"No, it's what they drink all over earth at present, but I have a
conceit of my own brand. Some of it is too strong of one fruit or of the
other, and all too sweet for health. This is compounded scientifically
and it's just right. If you are not accustomed to cold drinks, go
slowly."

"You can't scare me," said the Girl; "I'm going to drink all I want."

There was a note of excitement in the Harvester's laugh.

"You must have some, too!"

"After a while," he said. "I was thirsty when I made it, so I don't care
for any more now. Try the fruit and those wafers. Of course they are not
home made--they are the best I could do at a bakery. Take time enough to
eat slowly. I'm going to tell you a tale while you lunch, and it's about
a Medicine Man named David Langston. It's a very peculiar story,
but it's quite true. This man lives in the woods east of Onabasha,
accompanied by his dog, horse, cow, and chickens, and a forest full of
birds, flowers, and matchless trees. He has lived there in this manner
for six long years, and every spring he and his dog have a seance and
agree whether he shall go on gathering medicinal herbs and trying his
hand at making medicine or go to the city and live as other men. Always
the dog chooses to remain in the woods.

"Then every spring, on the day the first bluebird comes, the dog also
decides whether the man shall go on alone or find a mate and bring her
home for company. Each year the dog regularly has decided that they live
as always. This spring, for some unforeseen reason, he changed his mind,
and compelled the man, according to his vow in the beginning, to go
courting. The man was so very angry at the idea of having a woman in
his home, interfering with his work, disturbing his arrangements, and
perhaps wanting to spend more money than he could afford, that he struck
the dog for making that decision; struck him for the very first time in
his life----I believe you'd like those apricots. Please try one."

"Go on with the story," said the Girl, sipping delicately but constantly
at the frosty glass.

The Harvester arose and refilled it. Then he dropped pieces of ice over
the fruit.

"Where was I?" he inquired casually.

"Where you struck Belshazzar, and it's no wonder," answered the Girl.

Without taking time to ponder that, the Harvester continued:

"But that night the man had a wonderful, golden dream. A beautiful girl
came to him, and she was so gracious and lovely that he was sufficiently
punished for striking his dog, because he fell unalterably in love with
her."

"Meaning you?" interrupted the Girl.

"Yes," said the Harvester, "meaning me. I----if you like----fell in love
with the girl. She came so alluringly, and I was so close to her that
I saw her better than I ever did any other girl, and I knew her for all
time. When she went, my heart was gone."

"And you have lived without that important organ ever since?"

"Without even the ghost of it! She took it with her. Well, that dream
was so real, that the next day I began building over my house, making
furniture, and planting flowers for her; and every day, wherever I went,
I watched for her."

"What nonsense!"

"I can't see it."

"You won't find a girl you dreamed about in a thousand years."

"Wrong!" cried the Harvester triumphantly. "Saw her in little less than
three months, but she vanished and it took some time and difficult work
before I located her again; but I've got her all solid now, and she
doesn't escape."

"Is she a 'lovely and gracious lady'?"

"She is!" said the Harvester, with all his heart.

"Young and beautiful, of course!"

"Indeed yes!"

"Please fill this glass. I told you what I was going to do."

The Harvester refilled the glass and the Girl drained it.

"Now won't you set aside these things and allow me to go to work?" she
asked. "My call may come any minute, and I'll never forgive myself if I
waste time, and don't draw your moth pattern for you."

"It's against my principles to hurry, and besides, my story isn't
finished."

"It is," said the Girl. "She is young and lovely, gentle and a lady, you
have her 'all solid,' and she can't 'escape'; that's the end, of course.
But if I were you, I wouldn't have her until I gave her a chance to get
away, and saw whether she would if she could."

"Oh I am not a jailer," said the Harvester. "She shall be free if I
cannot make her love me; but I can, and I will; I swear it."

"You are not truly in earnest?"

"I am in deadly earnest."

"Honestly, you dreamed about a girl, and found the very one?"

"Most certainly, I did."

"It sounds like the wildest romancing."

"It is the veriest reality."

"Well I hope you win her, and that she will be everything you desire."

"Thank you," said the Harvester. "It's written in the book of fate
that I succeed. The very elements are with me. The South Wind carried
a message to her for me. I am going to marry her, but you could make it
much easier for me if you would."

"I! What could I do?" cried the Girl.

"You could cease being afraid of me. You could learn to trust me. You
could try to like me, if you see anything likeable about me. That would
encourage me so that I could tell you of my Dream Girl, and then you
could show me how to win her. A woman always knows about those things
better than a man. You could be the greatest help in all the world to
me, if only you would."

"I couldn't possibly! I can't leave here. I have no proper clothing to
appear before another girl. She would be shocked at my white face. That
I could help you is the most improbable dream you have had."

"You must pardon me if I differ from you, and persist in thinking that
you can be of invaluable assistance to me, if you will. But you can't
influence my Dream Girl, if you fear and distrust me yourself. Promise
me that you will help me that much, anyway."

"I'll do all I can. I only want to make you see that I am in no position
to grant any favours, no matter how much I owe you or how I'd like to.
Is the candlestick you are carving for her?"

"It is," said the Harvester. "I am making a pair of maple to stand on a
dressing table I built for her. It is unusually beautiful wood, I think,
and I hope she will be pleased with it."

"Please take these things away and let me begin. This is the only thing
I can see that I can do for you, and the moth will want to fly before I
have finished."

The Harvester cleared the table and placed the box, while the Girl
spread the paper and began work eagerly.

"I wonder if I knew there were such exquisite things in all the world,"
she said. "I scarcely think I did. I am beginning to understand why you
couldn't kill one. You could make a chair or a table, and so you feel
free to destroy them; but it takes ages and Almighty wisdom to evolve a
creature like this, so you don't dare. I think no one else would if they
really knew. Please talk while I work."

"Is there a particular subject you want discussed?"

"Anything but her. If I think too strongly of her, I can't work so
well."

"Your ginseng is almost dry," said the Harvester. "I think I can bring
you the money in a few days."

"So soon!" she cried.

"It dries day and night in an even temperature, and faster than you
would believe. There's going to be between seven and eight pounds of
it, when I make up what it has shrunk. It will go under the head of the
finest wild roots. I can get eight for it sure."

"Oh what good news!" cried the Girl. "This is my lucky day, too. And the
little girl isn't coming, so Aunt Molly must be asleep. Everything goes
right! If only Uncle Henry wouldn't come home!"

"Let me fill your glass," proffered the Harvester.

"Just half way, and set it where I can see it," said the Girl. She
worked with swift strokes and there was a hint of colour in her face, as
she looked at him. "I hope you won't think I'm greedy," she said, "but
truly, that's the first thing I've had that I could taste in----I can't
remember when."

"I'll bring a barrel to-morrow," offered the Harvester, "and a big piece
of ice wrapped in coffee sacking."

"You mustn't think of such a thing! Ice is expensive and so are fruits."

"Ice costs me the time required to saw and pack it at my home. I almost
live on the fruit I raise. I confess to a fondness for this drink. I
have no other personal expenses, unless you count in books, and a very
few clothes, such as I'm wearing; so I surely can afford all the fruit
juice I want."

"For yourself, yes."

"Also for a couple of women or I am a mighty poor attempt at a man,"
said the Harvester. "This is my day, so you are not to talk, because it
won't do any good. Things go my way."

"Please see what you think of this," she said.

The Harvester arose and bent over her.

"That will do finely," he answered. "You can stop. I don't require all
those little details for carving, I just want a good outline. It is
finished. See here!"

He drew some folded papers from his pocket and laid them before her.

"Those are what I have been working from," he said.

The Girl took them and studied each carefully.

"If those are worth five dollars to you," she said gently, "why then I
needn't hesitate to take as much for mine. They are superior."

"I should say so," laughed the Harvester as he took up the drawing and
laid down the money.

"If you would make it half that much I'd feel better about it," she
said.

"How could I?" asked the Harvester. "Your fingers are well trained and
extremely skilful. Because some one has not been paying you enough for
your work is no reason why I should keep it up. From now on you must
have what others get. As soon as you can arrange for work, I want to
tell you about some designs I have studied out from different things,
show you the plants and insects, and have you make some samples. I'll
send them to proper places, and see what experts say about the ideas and
drawing. Work in the woods is healthful, with proper precautions;
it's easy compared with the exactions of being bound to sewing or
embroidering in the confinement of a room; it's vividly interesting
in the search for new subjects, changes of material, and differing
harmonious combinations; it's truly artistic; and it brings the prices
high grade stuff always does."

"Almost you give me hope," said the Girl. "Almost, Man----almost! Since
mother died, I haven't thought or planned beyond paying for the medicine
she took and the shelter she lies in. Oh I didn't mean to say that----!"

She buried her face in her hands. The Harvester suffered until he
scarcely knew how to bear it.

"Please finish," he begged. "You hadn't planned beyond the debt, you
were saying----"

The Girl lifted her tired, strained face.

"Give me a little more of that delicious drink," she said. "I am
ravenous for it. It puts new life in me. This and what you say bring a
far away, misty vision of a clean, bright, peaceful room somewhere, and
work one could love and live on in comfort; enough to give a desire to
finish life to its natural end. Oh Man, you make me hope in spite of
myself!"

"'Praise God from whom all blessings flow;'" quoted the Harvester
reverently. "Now try one of these peaches. It's juicy and cold. Get that
room right in focus in your brain, and nurture the idea. Its walls shall
be bright as sunshine, its floor creamy white, and it shall open into a
little garden, where only yellow flowers grow, and the birds shall sing.
The first ray of sun that peeps over the hills of morning shall fall
through its windows across your bed, and you shall work only as you
please, after you've had months of play and rest; and it's coming true
the instant you can leave here. Dream of it, make up your mind to it,
because it's coming. I have a little streak of second sight, and I see
it on the way."

"You are talking wildly," said the Girl, "else you are a good genie
trying to conjure a room for me."

"This room I am talking of is ready whenever you want to take
possession," said the Harvester. "Accept it as a reality, because I tell
you I know where it is, that it is waiting, and you can earn your way
into it with no obligation to any one."

The Girl stretched out her right hand and slowly turned and opened and
closed it. Then she glanced at the Harvester with a weary smile.

"From somewhere I feel a glimmering of the spirit, but Oh, dear Lord,
the flesh is weak!" she said.

"That's where nourishing foods, appetizing drinks, plenty of pure, fresh
air, and good water come in. Now we have talked enough for one day, and
worked too much. The fruit and drink go with you. I will carry it to the
house, and you can hide it in your room. I am going to put a bottle of
tonic on top that the best surgeon in the state gave me for you. Try to
eat something strengthening and then take a spoonful of this, and use
all the fruit you want. I'll bring more to-morrow and put it here, with
plenty of ice. Now suppose you let the moth go free," he suggested to
avoid objections. "You must take my word for it, that it is perfectly
harmless, lacking either sting or bite, and hold your hand before it, so
that it will climb on your fingers. Then stand where a ray of sunshine
falls and in a few minutes it will go out to live its life."

The Girl hesitated a second as she studied the clean-cut, interested
face of the man; then she held out her hand, and he urged the moth to
climb on her fingers. She stepped where a ray of strong light fell on
the forest floor and held the moth in it. The brightness also touched
her transparent hand and white face and the gleaming black hair. The
Harvester choked down a rising surge of desire for her, and took a new
grip on himself.

"Oh!" she cried breathlessly, as the clinging feet suddenly loosened and
the luna slowly flew away among the trees. She turned on the Harvester.
"You teach me wonders!" she cried. "You give life different meanings.
You are not as other men."

"If that be true, it is because I am of the woods. The Almighty does not
evolve all his wonders in animal, bird, and flower form; He keeps some
to work out in the heart, if humanity only will go to His school, and
allow Him to have dominion. Come now, you must go. I will come back and
put away all the things and tomorrow I will bring your ginseng money.
Any time you cannot come, if you want to tell me why, or if there is
anything I can do for you, put a line under the oilcloth. I will carry
the bucket."

"I am so afraid," she said.

"I will only go to the edge of the woods. You can see if there is any
one at the house first. If not, you can send the child away, and then I
will carry the bucket to the door for you, and it will furnish comfort
for one night, at least."

They went to the cleared land and the Girl passed on alone. Soon she
reappeared and the Harvester saw the child going down the road. He took
up the bucket and set it inside the door.

"Is there anything I can do for you?"

"Nothing but go, before you make trouble."

"Will you hide that stuff and walk back as far as the woods with me?
There is something more I want to say to you."

The Girl staggered under the heavy load, and the man turned his head and
tried to pretend he did not see. Presently she came out to him, and they
returned to the line of the woods. Just as they entered the shade there
was a flash before them, and on a twig a few rods away a little gray
bird alighted, while in precipitate pursuit came a flaming wonder of
red, and in a burst of excited trills, broken whistles, and imploring
gestures, perched beside her.

The Harvester hastily drew the Girl behind some bushes.

"Watch!" he whispered. "You are going to see a sight so lovely and so
rare it is vouchsafed to few mortals ever to behold."

"What are they fighting about?" she whispered.

"You are witnessing a cardinal bird declare his love," breathed the
Harvester.

"Do cardinals love different birds?"

"No. The female is gray, because if she is  the same as the
trees and branches and her nest, she will have more chance to bring off
her young in safety. He is blood red, because he is the bravest, gayest,
most ardent lover of the whole woods," explained the Harvester.

The Girl leaned forward breathlessly watching and a slow surge of colour
crept into her cheeks. The red bird twisted, whistled, rocked, tilted,
and trilled, and the gray sat demurely watching him, as if only half
convinced he really meant it. The gay lover began at the beginning and
said it all over again with more impassioned gestures than before, and
then he edged in touch and softly stroked her wing with his beak.
She appeared startled, but did not fly. So again the fountain of
half-whistled, half-trilled notes bubbled with the acme of pleading
intonation and that time he leaned and softly kissed her as she reached
her bill for the caress. Then she fled in headlong flight, while the
streak of flame darted after her. The Girl caught her breath in a swift
spasm of surprise and wonder. She turned to the Harvester.

"What was it you wanted to say to me?" she asked hurriedly.

The Harvester was not the man to miss the goods the gods provided. Truly
this was his lucky day. Unhesitatingly he took the plunge.

"Precisely what he said to her. And if you observed closely, you noticed
that she didn't ask him 'why.'"

Before she could open her lips, he was gone, his swift strides carrying
him through the woods.



CHAPTER XII. "THE WAY OF A MAN WITH A MAID"

The next day the Harvester lifted the oilcloth, and picking up a folded
note he read----

"Aunt Molly found rest in the night. She was more comfortable than she
had been since I have known her. Close the end she whispered to me to
thank you if I ever saw you again. She will be buried to-morrow. Past
that, I dare not think."

The Harvester sat on the log and studied the lines. She would not come
that day or the next. After a long time he put the note in his pocket,
wrote an answer telling her he had been there, and would come on the
following day on the chance of her wanting anything he could do, and the
next he would bring the ginseng money, so she must be sure to meet him.

Then he went back to the wagon, turned Betsy, and drove around the
Jameson land watching closely. There were several vehicles in the barn
lot, and a couple of men sitting under the trees of the door yard. Faded
bedding hung on the line and women moved through the rooms, but he could
not see the Girl. Slowly he drove on until he came to the first house,
and there he stopped and went in. He saw the child of the previous day,
and as she came forward her mother appeared in the doorway.

The Harvester explained who he was and that he was examining the woods
in search of some almost extinct herbs he needed in his business.
Then he told of having been at the adjoining farm the day before and
mentioned the sick woman. He added that later she had died. He casually
mentioned that a young woman there seemed pale and ill and wondered
if the neighbours would see her through. He suggested that the place
appeared as if the owner did not take much interest, and when the woman
finished with Henry Jameson, he said how very important it seemed to him
that some good, kind-hearted soul should go and mother the poor girl,
and the woman thought she was the very person. Without knowing exactly
how he did it, the Harvester left with her promise to remain with the
Girl the coming two nights. The woman had her hands full of strange and
delicious fruit without understanding why it had been given her, or why
she had made those promises. She thought the Harvester a remarkably fine
young man to take such interest in strangers and she told him he was
welcome to anything he could find on her place that would help with his
medicines.

The Harvester just happened to be coming from the woods as the woman
freshly dressed left the house, so he took her in the wagon and drove
back to the Jameson place, because he was going that way. Then he
returned to Medicine Woods and worked with all his might.

First he polished floors, cleaned windows, and arranged the rooms
as best he could inside the cabin; then he gave a finishing touch to
everything outside. He could not have told why he did it, but he thought
it was because there was hope that now the Girl would come to Onabasha.
If he found opportunity to bring her to the city, he hoped that possibly
he might drive home with her and show Medicine Woods, so everything
must be in order. Then he worked with flying fingers in the dry-house,
putting up her ginseng for market, and never was weight so liberal.

The next morning he drove early to Onabasha and came home with a loaded
wagon, the contents of which he scattered through the cabin where it
seemed most suitable, but the greater part of it was for her. He glanced
at the bare floors and walls of the other rooms, and thought of trying
to improve them, but he was afraid of not getting the right things.

"I don't know much about what is needed here," he said, "but I am
perfectly safe in buying anything a girl ever used."

Then he returned to the city, explained the situation to the doctor, and
selected the room he wanted in case the Girl could be persuaded to come
to the hospital. After that he went to see the doctor's wife, and
made arrangements for her to be ready for a guest, because there was a
possibility he might want to call for help. He had another jug of fruit
juice and all the delicacies he could think of, also a big cake of ice,
when he reached the woods. There were only a few words for him.

"I will come to-morrow at two, if at all possible; if not, keep the
money until I can."

There was nothing to do except to place his offering under the oilcloth
and wait, but he simply was compelled to add a line to say he would be
there, and to express the hope that she was comfortable as possible and
thinking of the sunshine room. Then he returned to Medicine Woods to
wait, and found that possible only by working to exhaustion. There were
many things he could do, and one after another he finished them, until
completely worn out; and then he slept the deep sleep of weariness.

At noon the next day he bathed, shaved, and dressed in fresh, clean
clothing. He stopped in Onabasha for more fruit, and drove to the
Jameson woods. He was waiting and watching the usual path the Girl
followed, when her step sounded on the other side. The Harvester arose
and turned. Her pallor was alarming. She stepped on the rug he had
spread, and sank almost breathless to the chair.

"Why do you come a new way that fills you with fear?" asked the
Harvester.

"It seems as if Uncle Henry is watching me every minute, and I didn't
dare come where he could see. I must not remain a second. You must take
these things away and go at once. He is dreadful."

"So am I," said the Harvester, "when affairs go too everlastingly wrong.
I am not afraid of any man living. What are you planning to do?"

"I want to ask you, are you sure about the prices of my drawing and the
ginseng?"

"Absolutely," said the Harvester. "As for the ginseng it went in fresh
and early, best wild roots, and it brought eight a pound. There were
eight pounds when I made up weight and here is your money."

He handed her a long envelope addressed to her.

"What is the amount?" she asked.

"Sixty-four dollars."

"I can't believe it."

"You have it in your fingers."

"You know that I would like to thank you properly, if I had words to
express myself."

"Never mind that," said the Harvester. "Tell me what you are planning.
Say that you will come to the hospital for the long, perfect rest now."

"It is absolutely impossible. Don't weary me by mentioning it. I
cannot."

"Will you tell me what you intend doing?"

"I must," she said, "for it depends entirely on your word. I am going
to get Uncle Henry's supper, and then go and remain the night with the
neighbour who has been helping me. In the morning, when he leaves, she
is coming with her wagon for my trunk, and she is going to drive with me
to Onabasha and find me a cheap room and loan me a few things, until I
can buy what I need. I am going to use fourteen dollars of this and my
drawing money for what I am forced to buy, and pay fifty on my debt.
Then I will send you my address and be ready for work."

She clutched the envelope and for the first time looked at him.

"Very well," said the Harvester. "I could take you to the wife of my
best friend, the chief surgeon of the city hospital, and everything
would be ease and rest until you are strong; she would love to have
you."

The Girl dropped her hands wearily.

"Don't tire me with it!" she cried. "I am almost falling despite the
stimulus of food and drink I can touch. I never can thank you properly
for that. I won't be able to work hard enough to show you how much I
appreciate what you have done for me. But you don't understand. A woman,
even a poverty-poor woman, if she be delicately born and reared, cannot
go to another woman on a man's whim, and when she lacks even the barest
necessities. I don't refuse to meet your friends. I shall love to, when
I can be so dressed that I will not shame you. Until that times comes,
if you are the gentleman you appear to be, you will wait without urging
me further."

"I must be a man, in order to be a gentleman," said the Harvester. "And
it is because the man in me is in hot rebellion against more loneliness,
pain, and suffering for you, that the conventions become chains I do not
care how soon or how roughly I break. If only you could be induced to
say the word, I tell you I could bring one of God's gentlest women to
you."

"And probably she would come in a dainty gown, in her carriage or motor,
and be disgusted, astonished, and secretly sorry for you. As for me, I
do not require her pity. I will be glad to know the beautiful, refined,
and gentle woman you are so certain of, but not until I am better
dressed and more attractive in appearance than now. If you will give me
your address, I will write you when I am ready for work."

Silently the Harvester wrote it. "Will you give me permission to take
these things to your neighbour for you?" he asked. "They would serve
until you can do better, and I have no earthly use for them."

She hesitated. Then she laughed shortly.

"What a travesty my efforts at pride are with you!" she cried. "I begin
by trying to preserve some proper dignity, and end by confessing abject
poverty. I yet have the ten you paid me the other day, but twenty-four
dollars are not much to set up housekeeping on, and I would be more glad
than I can say for these very things."

"Thank you," said the Harvester. "I will take them when I go. Is there
anything else?"

"I think not."

"Will you have a drink?"

"Yes, if you have more with you. I believe it is really cooling my
blood."

"Are you taking the medicine?"

"Yes," she said, "and I am stronger. Truly I am. I know I appear ghastly
to you, but it's loss of sleep, and trying to lay away poor Aunt Molly
decently, and----"

"And fear of Uncle Henry," added the Harvester.

"Yes," said the Girl. "That most of all! He thinks I am going to stay
here and take her place. I can't tell him I am not, and how I am to hide
from him when I am gone, I don't know. I am afraid of him."

"Has he any claim on you?"

"Shelter for the past three months."

"Are you of age?"

"I am almost twenty-four," she said.

"Then suppose you leave Uncle Henry to me," suggested the Harvester.

"Why?"

"Careful now! The red bird told you why!" said the man. "I will not
urge it upon you now, but keep it steadily in the back of your head that
there is a sunshine room all ready and waiting for you, and I am going
to take you to it very soon. As things are, I think you might allow me
to tell you----"

She was on her feet in instant panic. "I must go," she said. "Uncle
Henry is dogging me to promise to remain, and I will not, and he is
watching me. I must go----"

"Can you give me your word of honour that you will go to the neighbour
woman to-night; that you feel perfectly safe?"

She hesitated. "Yes, I----I think so. Yes, if he doesn't find out and
grow angry. Yes, I will be safe."

"How soon will you write me?"

"Just as soon as I am settled and rest a little."

"Do you mean several days?"

"Yes, several days."

"An eternity!" cried the Harvester with white lips. "I cannot let you
go. Suppose you fall ill and fail to write me, and I do not know where
you are, and there is no one to care for you."

"But can't you see that I don't know where I will be? If it will satisfy
you, I will write you a line to-morrow night and tell you where I am,
and you can come later."

"Is that a promise?" asked the Harvester.

"It is," said the Girl.

"Then I will take these things to your neighbour and wait until
to-morrow night. You won't fail me?"

"I never in all my life saw a man so wild over designs," said the Girl,
as she started toward the house.

"Don't forget that the design I'm craziest about is the same as the red
bird's," the Harvester flung after her, but she hurried on and made no
reply.

He folded the table and chair, rolled the rug, and shouldering them
picked up the bucket and started down the river bank.

"David!"

Such a faint little call he never would have been sure he heard anything
if Belshazzar had not stopped suddenly. The hair on the back of his neck
arose and he turned with a growl in his throat. The Harvester dropped
his load with a crash and ran in leaping bounds, but the dog was before
him. Half way to the house, Ruth Jameson swayed in the grip of her
uncle. One hand clutched his coat front in a spasmodic grasp, and with
the other she covered her face.

The roar the Harvester sent up stayed the big, lifted fist, and the dog
leaped for a throat hold, and compelled the man to defend himself. The
Harvester never knew how he covered the space until he stood between
them, and saw the Girl draw back and snatch together the front of her
dress.

"He took it from me!" she panted. "Make him, oh make him give back my
money!"

Then for a few seconds things happened too rapidly to record. Once the
Harvester tossed a torn envelope exposing money to the Girl, and again a
revolver, and then both men panting and dishevelled were on their feet.

"Count your money, Ruth?" said the Harvester in a voice of deadly quiet.

"It is all here," said she.

"Her money?" cried Henry Jameson. "My money! She has been stealing the
price of my cattle from my pockets. I thought I was short several times
lately."

"You are lying," said the Harvester deliberately. "It is her money. I
just paid it to her. You were trying to take it from her, not the other
way."

"Oh, she is in your pay?" leered the man.

"If you say an insulting word I think very probably I will finish you,"
said the Harvester. "I can, with my naked hands, and all your neighbours
will say it is a a good job. You have felt my grip! I warn you!"

"How does my niece come to be taking money from you!"

"You have forfeited all right to know. Ruth, you cannot remain here. You
must come with me. I will take you to Onabasha and find you a room."

A horrible laugh broke from the man.

"So that is the end of my saintly niece!" he said.

"Remember!" cried the Harvester advancing a step. "Ruth, will you go to
the rest I suggested for you?"

"I cannot."

"Will you go to Doctor Carey's wife?"

"Impossible!"

"Will you marry me and go to the shelter of my home with me?"

Wild-eyed she stared at him.

"Why?"

"Because I love you, and want life made easier for you, above anything
else on earth."

"But your Dream Girl!"

"YOU ARE THE DREAM GIRL! I thought the red bird told you for me! I
didn't know it would be a shock. I believed I had made you understand."

By that time she was shaking with a nervous chill, and the sight
unmanned the Harvester.

"Come with me!" he urged. "We will decide what you want to do on the
way. Only come, I beg you."

"First it was marry, now it's decide later," broke in Henry Jameson,
crazed with anger. "Move a step and I'll strike you down. I'd better
than see you disgraced----"

The Harvester advanced and Jameson stepped back.

"Ruth," said the Harvester, "I know how impossible this seems. It is
giving you no chance at all. I had intended, when I found you, to court
you tenderly as girl ever was wooed before. Come with me, and I'll do
it yet. The new home was built for you. The sunshine room is ready and
waiting for you. There is pure air, fresh water, nothing but rest and
comfort. I'll nurse you back to health and strength, and you shall be
courted until you come to me of your own accord."

"Impossible!" cried the girl.

"Only if you make it so. If you will come now, we can be married in a
few hours, and you can be safe in your own home. I realize now that
this is unexpected and shocking to you, but if you will come with me and
allow me to restore you to health and strength, and if, say, in a year,
you are convinced that you do not love me, I will set you free. If
you will come, I swear to you that you shall be my wife first, and my
honoured guest afterward, until such time as you either tell me you love
me or that you never can. Will you come on those terms, Ruth?"

"I cannot!"

"It will end fear, uncertainty, and work, until you are strong and well.
It will give you home, rest, and love, that you will find is worth your
consideration. I will keep my word; of that you may be sure."

"No," she cried. "No! But take back this money! Keep it until I tell you
to whom to pay it."

She started toward him holding out the envelope.

Henry Jameson, with a dreadful oath, sprang for it, his contorted face
a drawn snarl. The Harvester caught him in air and sent him reeling. He
snatched the revolver from the Girl and put the money in his pocket.

"Ruth, I can't leave you here," he said. "Oh my Dream Girl! Are you
afraid of me yet? Won't you trust me? Won't you come?"

"No."

"You are right about that, my lady; you will come back to the house,
that's what you'll do," said Henry Jameson, starting toward her.

"No!" cried the Girl retreating. "Oh Heaven help me! What am I to do?"

"Ruth, you must come with me," said the Harvester. "I don't dare leave
you here."

She stood between them and gave Henry Jameson one long, searching look.
Then she turned to the Harvester.

"I am far less afraid of you. I will accept your offer," she said.

"Thank you!" said the Harvester. "I will keep my word and you shall have
no regrets. Is there anything here you wish to take with you?"

"I want a little trunk of my mother's. It contains some things of hers."

"Will you show me where it is?"

She started toward the house; he followed, and Henry Jameson fell in
line. The Harvester turned on him. "You remain where you are," he said.
"I will take nothing but the trunk. I know what you are thinking,
but you will not get your gun just now. I will return this revolver
to-morrow."

"And the first thing I do with it will be to use it on you," said Henry
Jameson.

"I'll report that threat to the police, so that they can see you
properly hanged if you do," retorted the Harvester, as he followed the
girl.

"Where is his gun?" he asked as he overtook her. When he reached the
house he told her to watch the door. He went inside, broke the lock from
the gun in the corner, found the trunk, and swinging it to his shoulder,
passed Henry Jameson and went back through the woods. The Harvester set
the trunk in the wagon, helped the Girl in, and returned for the load
he had dropped at her call. Then he took the lines and started for
Onabasha.

The Girl beside him was almost fainting. He stopped to give her a drink
and tried to encourage her.

"Brace up the best you can, Ruth," he said. "You must go with me for a
license; that is the law. Afterward, I'll make it just as easy for
you as possible. I will do everything, and in a few hours you will be
comfortable in your room. You brave girl! This must come out right!
You have suffered more than your share. I will have peace for you the
remainder of the way."

She lifted shaking hands and tried to arrange her hair and dress. As
they neared the city she spoke.

"What will they ask me?"

"I don't know. But I am sure the law requires you to appear in person
now. I can take you somewhere and find out first."

"That will take time. I want to reach my room. What would you think?"

"If you are of age, where you were born, if you are a native of this
country, what your father and mother died of, how old they were, and
such questions as that. I'll help you all I can. You know those things.
don't you?"

"Yes. But I must tell you----"

"I don't want to be told anything," said the Harvester. "Save your
strength. All I want to know is any way in which I can make this easier
for you. Nothing else matters. I will tell you what I think; if you have
any objections, make them. I will drive to the bank and get a draft for
what you owe, and have that off your mind. Then we will get the license.
After that I'll take you to the side door, slip you in the elevator and
to the fitting room of a store where I know the manager, and you shall
have some pretty clothing while I arrange for a minister, and I'll come
for you with a carriage. That isn't the kind of wedding you or any other
girl should have, but there are times when a man only can do his best.
You will help me as much as you can, won't you?"

"Anything you choose. It doesn't matter----only be quick as possible."

"There are a few details to which I must attend," said the Harvester,
"and the time will go faster trying on dresses than waiting alone. When
you are properly clothed you will feel better. What did you say the
amount you owe is?"

"You may get a draft for fifty dollars. I will pay the remainder when I
earn it."

"Ruth, won't you give me the pleasure of taking you home free from the
worry of that debt?"

"I am not going to 'worry.' I am going to work and pay it."

"Very well," said the Harvester. "This is the bank. We will stop here."

They went in and he handed her a slip of paper.

"Write the name and address on that?" he said.

As the slip was returned to him, without a glance he folded it and slid
it under a wicket. "Write a draft for fifty dollars payable to that
party, and send to that address, from Miss Ruth Jameson," he said.

Then he turned to her.

"That is over. See how easy it is! Now we will go to the court house. It
is very close. Try not to think. Just move and speak."

"Hello, Langston!" said the clerk. "What can we do for you here?"

"Show this girl every consideration," whispered the Harvester, as he
advanced. "I want a marriage license in your best time. I will answer
first."

With the document in his possession, they went to the store he
designated, where he found the Girl a chair in the fitting room, while
he went to see the manager.

"I want one of your most sensible and accommodating clerks," said the
Harvester, "and I would like a few words with her."

When she was presented he scrutinized her carefully and decided she
would do.

"I have many thanks and something more substantial for a woman who will
help me to carry through a slightly unusual project with sympathy and
ability," he said, "and the manager has selected you. Are you willing?"

"If I can," said the clerk.

"She has put up your other orders," interposed the manager; "were they
satisfactory?"

"I don't know," said the Harvester. "They have not yet reached the one
for whom they were intended. What I want you to do," he said to the
clerk, "is to go to the fitting room and dress the girl you find there
for her wedding. She had other plans, but death disarranged them, and
she has only an hour in which to meet the event most girls love to
linger over for months. She has been ill, and is worn with watching; but
some time she may look back to her wedding day with joy, and if only
you would help me to make the best of it for her, I would be, as I said,
under more obligations than I can express."

"I will do anything," said the clerk.

"Very well," said the Harvester. "She has come from the country entirely
unprepared. She is delicate and refined. Save her all the embarrassment
you can. Dress her beautifully in white. Keep a memorandum slip of what
you spend for my account."

"What is the limit?" asked the clerk.

"There is none," said the Harvester. "Put the prettiest things on her
you have in the right sizes, and if you are a woman with a heart, be
gentle!"

"Is she ready?" inquired the manager at the door an hour later.

"I am," said the Girl stepping through.

The astounded Harvester stood and stared, utterly oblivious of the
curious people.

"Here, here, here!" suddenly he whistled it, in the red bird's most
entreating tones.

The Girl laughed and the colour in her face deepened.

"Let us go," she said.

"But what about you?" asked the manager of the Harvester.

"Thunder!" cried the man aghast. "I was so busy getting everything else
ready, I forgot all about myself. I can't stand before a minister beside
her, can I?"

"Well I should say not," said the manager.

"Indeed yes," said the Girl. "I never saw you in any other clothing. You
would be a stranger of whom I'd be afraid."

"That settles it!" said the Harvester calmly. "Thank all of you more
than words can express. I will come in the first of the week and tell
you how we get along."

Then they went to the carriage and started for the residence of a
minister.

"Ruth, you are my Dream Girl to the tips of your eyelashes," said the
Harvester. "I almost wish you were not. It wouldn't keep me thinking so
much of the remainder of that dream. You are the loveliest sight I ever
saw."

"Do I really appear well?" asked the Girl, hungry for appreciation.

"Indeed you do!" said the Harvester. "I never could have guessed that
such a miracle could be wrought. And you don't seem so tired. Were they
good to you?"

"Wonderfully! I did not know there was kindness like that in all the
world for a stranger. I did not feel lost or embarrassed, except the
first few seconds when I didn't know what to do. Oh I thank you for
this! You were right. Whatever comes in life I always shall love to
remember that I was daintily dressed and appeared as well as I could
when I was married. But I must tell you I am not real. They did
everything on earth to me, three of them working at a time. I feel an
increase in self-respect in some way. David, I do appear better?"

When she said "David," the Harvester looked out of the window and gulped
down his delight. He leaned toward her.

"Shut your eyes and imagine you see the red bird," he said. "In my
soul, I am saying to you again and again just what he sang. You are
wonderfully beautiful, Ruth, and more than wonderfully sweet. Will you
answer me a question?"

"If I can."

"I love you with all my heart. Will you marry me?"

"I said I would."

"Then we are engaged, aren't we?"

"Yes."

"Please remove the glove from your left hand. I want to put on your
ring. This will have to be a very short engagement, but no one save
ourselves need know."

"David, that isn't necessary."

"I have it here, and believe me, Ruth, it will help in a few minutes;
and all your life you will be glad. It is a precious symbol that has a
meaning. This wedding won't be hurt by putting all the sacredness into
it we can. Please, Ruth!"

"On one condition."

"What is it?"

"That you will accept and wear my mother's wedding ring in exchange,"
she said. "It is all I have."

"Ruth, do you really wish that?"

"I do."

"I am more pleased than I can tell you. May I have it now?"

She took off her glove and the Harvester held her hand closely a second,
then lifted it to his lips, passionately kissed it and slipped on a
ring, the setting a big, lustrous pearl.

"I looked at some others," he said, "but nothing got a second glance
save this. They knew you were coming down the ages, and so they got the
pearls ready. How beautiful it is on your hand! Put on the glove and
wear that ring as if you had owned it for the long, happy year of
betrothal every girl should have. You can start yours to-day, and if by
this time next year I have not won you to my heart and arms, I'm no
man and not worthy of you. Ruth, you will try just a little to love me,
won't you?"

"I will try with all my heart," she said instantly.

"Thank you! I am perfectly happy with that. I never expected to marry
you before a year, anyway. All the difference will be the blessed fact
that instead of coming to see you somewhere else, I now can have you in
my care, and court you every minute. You might as well make up your mind
to capitulate soon. It's on the books that you do."

"If an instant ever comes when I realize that I love you, I will come
straight and tell you; believe me, I will."

"Thank you!" said the Harvester. "This is going to be quite a proper
wedding after all. Here is the place. It will be over soon and you on
the home way. Lord, Ruth----!"

The Girl smiled at him as he opened the carriage door, helped her up the
steps and rang the bell.

"Be brave now!" he whispered. "Don't lose your lovely colour. These
people will be as kind as they were at the store."

The minister was gentle and wasted no time. His wife and daughter, who
appeared for witnesses, kissed Ruth, and congratulated her. She and the
Harvester stood, took the vows, exchanged rings, and returned to the
carriage, a man and his wife by the laws of man.

"Drive to Seaton's cafe'," the Harvester said.

"Oh David, let us go home!"

"This is so good I hate to stop it for something you may not like so
well. I ordered lunch and if we don't eat it I will have to pay for it
anyway. You wouldn't want me to be extravagant, would you?"

"No," said the Girl, "and besides, since you mention it, I believe I am
hungry."

"Good!" cried the Harvester. "I hoped so! Ruth, you wouldn't allow me
to hold your hand just until we reach the cafe'? It might save me from
bursting with joy."

"Yes," she said. "But I must take off my lovely gloves first. I want to
keep them forever."

"I'd hate the glove being removed dreadfully," said the Harvester, his
eyes dancing and snapping.

"I'm sorry I am so thin and shaky," said the Girl. "I will be steady and
plump soon, won't I?"

"On your life you will," said the Harvester, taking the hand gently.

Now there are a number of things a man deeply in love can think of to do
with a woman's white hand. He can stroke it, press it tenderly, and lay
it against his lips and his heart. The Harvester lacked experience
in these arts, and yet by some wonderful instinct all of these things
occurred to him. There was real colour in the Girl's cheeks by the time
he helped her into the cafe'. They were guided to a small room, cool and
restful, close a window, beside which grew a tree covered with talking
leaves. A waiting attendant, who seemed perfectly adept, brought in
steaming bouillon, fragrant tea, broiled chicken, properly cooked
vegetables, a wonderful salad, and then delicious ices and cold fruit.
The happy Harvester leaned back and watched the Girl daintily manage
almost as much food as he wanted to see her eat.

When they had finished, "Now we are going home," he said. "Will you try
to like it, Ruth?"

"Indeed I will," she promised. "As soon as I grow accustomed to the
dreadful stillness, and learn what things will not bite me, I'll be
better."

"I'll have to ask you to wait a minute," he said. "One thing I forgot. I
must hire a man to take Betsy home."

"Aren't you going to drive her yourself?"

"No ma'am! We are going in a carriage or a motor," said the Harvester.

"Indeed we are not!" contradicted the Girl. "You have had this all your
way so far. I am going home behind Betsy, with Belshazzar at my knee."

"But your dress! People will think I am crazy to put a lovely woman like
you in a spring wagon."

"Let them!" said the Girl placidly. "Why should we bother about other
people? I am going with Betsy and Belshazzar."

The Harvester had been thinking that he adored her, that it was
impossible to love her more, but every minute was proving to him that he
was capable of feeling so profound it startled him. To carry the Girl,
his bride, through the valley and up the hill in the little spring wagon
drawn by Betsy--that would have been his ideal way. But he had supposed
that she would be afraid of soiling her dress, and embarrassed to ride
in such a conveyance. Instead it was her choice. Yes, he could love her
more. Hourly she was proving that.

"Come this way a few steps," he said. "Betsy is here."

The Girl laid her face against the nose of the faithful old animal, and
stroked her head and neck. Then she held her skirts and the Harvester
helped her into the wagon. She took the seat, and the dog went wild with
joy.

"Come on, Bel," she softly commanded.

The dog hesitated, and looked at the Harvester for permission.

"You may come here and put your head on my knee," said the Girl.

"Belshazzar, you lucky dog, you are privileged to sit there and lay your
head on the lady's lap," said the Harvester, and the dog quivered with
joy.

Then the man picked up the lines, gave a backward glance to the bed
of the wagon, high piled with large bundles, and turned Betsy toward
Medicine Woods. Through the crowded streets and toward the country they
drove, when a big red car passed, a man called to them, then reversed
and slowly began backing beside the wagon. The Harvester stopped.

"That is my best friend, Doctor Carey, of the hospital, Ruth," he said
hastily. "May I tell him, and will you shake hands with him?"

"Certainly!" said the Girl.

"Is it really you, David?" the doctor peered with gleaming eyes from
under the car top.

"Really!" cried the Harvester, as man greets man with a full heart when
he is sure of sympathy. "Come, give us your best send-off, Doc! We were
married an hour ago. We are headed for Medicine Woods. Doctor Carey,
this is Mrs. Langston."

"Mighty glad to know you!" cried the doctor, reaching a happy hand.

The Girl met it cordially, while she smiled on him.

"How did this happen?" demanded the doctor. "Why didn't you let us know?
This is hardly fair of you, David. You might have let me and the Missus
share with you."

"That is to be explained," said the Harvester. "It was decided on very
suddenly, and rather sadly, on account of the death of Mrs. Jameson. I
forced Ruth to marry me and come with me. I grow rather frightened when
I think of it, but it was the only way I knew. She absolutely refused my
other plans. You see before you a wild man carrying away a woman to his
cave."

"Don't believe him, Doctor!" laughed the Girl. "If you know him, you
will understand that to offer all he had was like him, when he saw my
necessity. You will come to see us soon?"

"I'll come right now," said the doctor. "I'll bring my wife and arrive
by the time you do."

"Oh no you won't!" said the Harvester. "Do you observe the bed of
this wagon? This happened all 'unbeknownst' to us. We have to set up
housekeeping after we reach home. We will notify you when we are ready
for visitors. Just you subside and wait until you are sent for."

"Why David!" cried the astonished Girl.

"That's the law!" said the Harvester tersely. "Good-bye, Doc; we'll be
ready for you in a day or two."

He leaned down and held out his hand. The grip that caught it said all
any words could convey; and then Betsy started up the hill.



CHAPTER XIII. WHEN THE DREAM CAME TRUE

At first the road lay between fertile farms dotted with shocked wheat,
covered with undulant seas of ripening oats, and forests of growing
corn. The larks were trailing melody above the shorn and growing fields,
the quail were ingathering beside the fences, and from the forests on
graceful wings slipped the nighthawks and sailed and soared, dropping
so low that the half moons formed by white spots on their spread wings
showed plainly.

"Why is this country so different from the other side of the city?"
asked the Girl.

"It is older," replied the Harvester, "and it lies higher. This was
settled and well cultivated when that was a swamp. But as a farming
proposition, the money is in the lowland like your uncle's. The crops
raised there are enormous compared with the yield of these fields."

"I see," said she. "But this is much better to look at and the air is
different. It lacks a soggy, depressing quality."

"I don't allow any air to surpass that of Medicine Woods," said the
Harvester, "by especial arrangement with the powers that be."

Then they dipped into a little depression and arose to cross the
railroad and then followed a longer valley that was ragged and unkempt
compared with the road between cultivated fields. The Harvester was busy
trying to plan what to do first, and how to do it most effectively, and
working his brain to think if he had everything the Girl would require
for her comfort; so he drove silently through the deepening shadows. She
shuddered and awoke him suddenly. He glanced at her from the corner of
his eye.

Her thoughts had gone on a journey, also, and the way had been rough,
for her face wore a strained appearance. The hands lying bare in her lap
were tightly gripped, so that the nails and knuckles appeared blue.
The Harvester hastily cast around seeking for the cause of the
transformation. A few minutes ago she had seemed at ease and
comfortable, now she was close open panic. Nothing had been said that
would disturb her. With brain alert he searched for the reason. Then
it began to come to him. The unaccustomed silence and depression of the
country might have been the beginning. Coming from the city and crowds
of people to the gloomy valley with a man almost a stranger, going she
knew not where, to conditions she knew not what, with the experiences of
the day vivid before her. The black valley road was not prepossessing,
with its border of green pools, through which grew swamp bushes and
straggling vines. The Harvester looked carefully at the road, and ceased
to marvel at the Girl. But he disliked to let her know he understood, so
he gave one last glance at those gripped hands and casually held out the
lines.

"Will you take these just a second?" he asked. "Don't let them touch
your dress. We must not lose of our load, because it's mostly things
that will make you more comfortable."

He arose, and turning, pretended to see that everything was all right.
Then he resumed his seat and drove on.

"I am a little ashamed of this stretch through here," he said
apologetically. "I could have managed to have it cleared and in better
shape long ago, but in a way it yields a snug profit, and so far I've
preferred the money. The land is not mine, but I could grub out this
growth entirely, instead of taking only what I need."

"Is there stuff here you use?" the Girl aroused herself to ask, and the
Harvester saw the look of relief that crossed her face at the sound of
his voice.

"Well I should say yes," he laughed. "Those bushes, numerous everywhere,
with the hanging yellow-green balls, those, in bark and root, go into
fever medicines. They are not so much used now, but sometimes I have a
call, and when I do, I pass the beds on my----on our land, and come down
here and get what is needed. That bush," he indicated with the whip,
"blooms exquisitely in the spring. It is a relative of flowering
dogwood, and the one of its many names I like best is silky cornel.
Isn't that pretty?"

"Yes," she said, "it is beautiful."

"I've planted some for you in a hedge along the driveway so next spring
you can gather all you want. I think you'll like the odour. The bark
brings more than true dogwood. If I get a call from some house that uses
it, I save mine and come down here. Around the edge are hop trees, and
I realize something from them, and also the false and true bitter-sweet
that run riot here. Both of them have pretty leaves, while the berries
of the true hang all winter and the colour is gorgeous. I've set your
hedge closely with them. When it has grown a few months it's going to
furnish flowers in the spring, a million different, wonderful leaves
and berries in the summer, many fruits the birds love in the fall, and
bright berries, queer seed pods, and nuts all winter."

"You planted it for me?"

"Yes. I think it will be beautiful in a season or two; it isn't so bad
now. I hope it will call myriads of birds to keep you company. When
you cross this stretch of road hereafter, don't see fetid water and
straggling bushes and vines; just say to yourself, this helps to fill
orders!"

"I am perfectly tolerant of it now," she said. "You make everything
different. I will come with you and help collect the roots and barks
you want. Which bush did you say relieved the poor souls scorching with
fever?"

The Harvester drew on the lines, Betsy swerved to the edge of the road,
and he leaned and broke a branch.

"This one," he answered. "Buttonbush, because those balls resemble round
buttons. Aren't they peculiar? See how waxy and gracefully cut and set
the leaves are. Go on, Betsy, get us home before night. We appear our
best early in the morning, when the sun tops Medicine Woods and begins
to light us up, and in the evening, just when she drops behind Onabasha
back there, and strikes us with a few level rays. Will you take the
lines until I open this gate?"

She laid the twig in her lap on the white gloves and took the lines.
As the gate swung wide, Betsy walked through and stopped at the usual
place.

"Now my girl," said the Harvester, "cross yourself, lean back, and take
your ease. This side that gate you are at home. From here on belongs to
us."

"To you, you mean," said the Girl.

"To us, I mean," declared the Harvester. "Don't you know that the
'worldly goods bestowal' clause in a marriage ceremony is a partial
reality. It doesn't give you 'all my worldly goods,' but it gives you
one third. Which will you take, the hill, lake, marsh, or a part of all
of them."

"Oh, is there water?"

"Did I forget to mention that I was formerly sole owner and proprietor
of the lake of Lost Loons, also a brook of Singing Water, and many cold
springs. The lake covers about one third of our land, and my neighbours
would allow me ditch outlet to the river, but they say I'm too lazy to
take it."

"Lazy! Do they mean drain your lake into the river?"

"They do," said the Harvester, "and make the bed into a cornfield."

"But you wouldn't?"

She turned to him with confidence.

"I haven't so far, but of course, when you see it, if you would prefer
it in a corn----Let's play a game! Turn your head in this direction,"
he indicated with the whip, "close your eyes, and open them when I say
ready."

"All right!"

"Now!" said the Harvester.

"Oh," cried the Girl. "Stop! Please stop!"

They were at the foot of a small levee that ran to the bridge crossing
Singing Water. On the left lay the valley through which the stream swept
from its hurried rush down the hill, a marshy thicket of vines, shrubs,
and bushes, the banks impassable with water growth. Everywhere flamed
foxfire and cardinal flower, thousands of wild tiger lilies lifted
gorgeous orange-red trumpets, beside pearl-white turtle head and moon
daisies, while all the creek bank was a coral line with the first
opening bloom of big pink mallows. Rank jewel flower poured gold from
dainty cornucopias and lavender beard-tongue offered honey to a million
bumbling bees; water smart-weed spread a glowing pink background, and
twining amber dodder topped the marsh in lacy mist with its delicate
white bloom. Straight before them a white-sanded road climbed to the
bridge and up a gentle hill between the young hedge of small trees and
bushes, where again flowers and bright colours rioted and led to the
cabin yet invisible. On the right, the hill, crowned with gigantic
forest trees, sloped to the lake; midway the building stood, and from
it, among scattering trees all the way to the water's edge, were immense
beds of vivid colour. Like a scarf of gold flung across the face of
earth waved the misty saffron, and beside the road running down the
hill, in a sunny, open space arose tree-like specimens of thrifty
magenta pokeberry. Down the hill crept the masses of colour, changing
from dry soil to water growth.

High around the blue-green surface of the lake waved lacy heads of wild
rice, lower cat-tails, bulrushes, and marsh grasses; arrowhead lilies
lifted spines of pearly bloom, while yellow water lilies and blue water
hyacinths intermingled; here and there grew a pink stretch of water
smartweed and the dangling gold of jewel flower. Over the water,
bordering the edge, starry faces of white pond lilies floated. Blue
flags waved graceful leaves, willows grew in clumps, and vines clambered
everywhere.

Among the growth of the lake shore, duck, coot, and grebe voices
commingled in the last chattering hastened splash of securing supper
before bedtime; crying killdeers crossed the water, and overhead the
nighthawks massed in circling companies. Betsy climbed the hill and at
every step the Girl cried, "Slower! please go slower!" With wide eyes
she stared around her.

"WHY DIDN'T YOU TELL ME IT WOULD BE LIKE THIS?" she demanded in awed
tones.

"Have I had opportunity to describe much of anything?" asked the
Harvester. "Besides, I was born and reared here, and while it has been
a garden of bloom for the past six years only, it always has been a
picture; but one forgets to say much about a sight seen every day and
that requires the work this does."

"That white mist down there, what is it?" she marvelled.

"Pearls grown by the Almighty," answered the Harvester. "Flowers that I
hope you will love. They are like you. Tall and slender, graceful, pearl
white and pearl pure----those are the arrowhead Lilies."

"And the wonderful purplish-red there on the bank? Oh, I could kneel and
pray before colour like that!'

"Pokeberry!" said the Harvester. "Roots bring five cents a pound. Good
blood purifier."

"Man!" cried the Girl. "How can you? I'm not going to ask what another
colour is. I'll just worship what I like in silence."

"Will you forgive me if I tell you what a woman whose judgment I respect
says about that colour?"

"Perhaps!"

"She says, 'God proves that He loves it best of all the tints in His
workshop by using it first and most sparingly.' Now are you going to
punish me by keeping silent?"

"I couldn't if I tried." Just then they came upon the bridge crossing
Singing Water, and there was a long view of its border, rippling bed,
and marshy banks; while on the other hand the lake resembled a richly
incrusted sapphire.

"Is the house close?"

"Just a few rods, at the turn of the drive."

"Please help me down. I want to remain here a while. I don't care what
else there is to see. Nothing can equal this. I wish I could bring down
a bed and sleep here. I'd like to have a table, and draw and paint. I
understand now what you mean about the designs you mentioned. Why, there
must be thousands! I can't go on. I never saw anything so appealing in
all my life."

Now the Harvester's mother had designed that bridge and he had built
it with much care. From bark-covered railings to solid oak floor and
comfortable benches running along the sides it was intended to be a part
of the landscape.

"I'll send Belshazzar to the cabin with the wagon," he said, "so you can
see better."

"But you must not!" she cried. "I can't walk. I wouldn't soil these
beautiful shoes for anything."

"Why don't you change them?" inquired the Harvester.

"I am afraid I forgot everything I had," said the Girl.

"There are shoes somewhere in this load. I thought of them in getting
other things for you, but I had no idea as to size, and so I told that
clerk to-day when she got your measure to put in every kind you'd need."

"You are horribly extravagant," she said. "But if you have them here,
perhaps I could use one pair."

The Harvester mounted the wagon and hunted until he found a large box,
and opening it on the bench he disclosed almost every variety of shoe,
walking shoe and slipper, a girl ever owned, as well as sandals and high
overshoes.

"For pity sake!" cried the Girl. "Cover that box! You frighten me.
You'll never get them paid for. You must take them straight back."

"Never take anything back," said the Harvester. "'Be sure you are right,
then go ahead,' is my motto. Now I know these are your correct size
and that for differing occasions you will want just such shoes as other
girls have, and here they are. Simple as life! I think these will serve
because they are for street wear, yet they are white inside."

He produced a pair of canvas walking shoes and kneeling before her held
out his hand.

When he had finished, he loaded the box on the wagon, gave the hitching
strap to Belshazzar, and told him to lead Betsy to the cabin and hold
her until he came. Then he turned to the Girl.

"Now," he said, "look as long as you choose. But remember that the law
gives you part of this and your lover, which same am I, gives you the
remainder, so you are privileged to come here at any hour as often as
you please. If you miss anything this evening, you have all time to come
in which to re-examine it."

"I'd like to live right here on this bridge," she said. "I wish it had a
roof."

"Roof it to-morrow," offered the Harvester. "Simple matter of a few
pillars already cut, joists joined, and some slab shingles left from the
cabin. Anything else your ladyship can suggest?"

"That you be sensible."

"I was born that way," explained the Harvester, "and I've cultivated the
faculty until I've developed real genius. Talking of sense, there never
was a proper marriage in which the man didn't give the woman a present.
You seem likely to be more appreciative of this bridge than anything
else I have, so right here and now would be the appropriate place to
offer you my wedding gift. I didn't have much time, but I couldn't have
found anything more suitable if I'd taken a year."

He held out a small, white velvet case.

"Doesn't that look as if it were made for a bride?" he asked.

"It does," answered the Girl. "But I can't take it. You are not doing
right. Marrying as we did, you never can believe that I love you; maybe
it won't ever happen that I do. I have no right to accept gifts and
expensive clothing from you. In the first place, if the love you ask
never comes, there is no possible way in which I can repay you. In the
second, these things you are offering are not suitable for life and work
in the woods. In the third, I think you are being extravagant, and I
couldn't forgive myself if I allowed that."

"You divide your statements like a preacher, don't you?" asked the
Harvester ingenuously. "Now sit thee here and gaze on the placid lake
and quiet your troubled spirit, while I demolish your 'perfectly good'
arguments. In the first place, you are now my wife, and you have a
right to take anything I offer, if you care for it or can use it in any
manner. In the second, you must recognize a difference in our positions.
What seems nothing to you means all the world to me, and you are less
than human if you deprive me of the joy of expressing feelings I am in
honour bound to keep in my heart, by these little material offerings. In
the third place, I inherited over six hundred acres of land and water,
please observe the water----it is now in evidence on your left. All my
life I have been taught to be frugal, economical, and to work. All I've
earned either has gone back into land, into the bank, or into books,
very plain food, and such clothing as you now see me wearing. Just the
value of this place as it stands, with its big trees, its drug crops
yielding all the year round, would be difficult to estimate; and I don't
mind telling you that on the top of that hill there is a gold mine, and
it's mine----ours since four o'clock."

"A gold mine!"

"Acres and acres of wild ginseng, seven years of age and ready to
harvest. Do you remember what your few pounds brought?"

"Why it's worth thousands!"

"Exactly! For your peace of mind I might add that all I have done or got
is paid for, except what I bought to-day, and I will write a check for
that as soon as the bill is made out. My bank account never will feel it
Truly, Ruth, I am not doing or going to do anything extravagant. I can't
afford to give you diamond necklaces, yachts, and trips to Europe; but
you can have the contents of this box and a motor boat on the lake, a
horse and carriage, and a trip----say to New York perfectly well. Please
take it."

"I wish you wouldn't ask me. I would be happier not to."

"Yes, but I do ask you," persisted the Harvester. "You are not the
only one to be considered. I have some rights also, and I'm not so
self-effacing that I won't insist upon them. From your standpoint I
am almost a stranger. You have spent no time considering me in near
relations; I realize that. You feel as if you were driven here for
a refuge, and that is true. I said to Belshazzar one day that I must
remember that you had no dream, and had spent no time loving me, and
I do I know how this wedding seems to you, but it's going to mean
something different and better soon, please God. I can see your side;
now suppose you take a look at mine. I did have a dream, it was my
dream, and beyond the sum of any delight I ever conceived. On the
strength of it I rebuilt my home and remodelled these premises. Then
I saw you, and from that day I worked early and late. I lost you and I
never stopped until I found you; and I would have courted and won you,
but the fates intervened and here you are! So it's my delight to court
and win you now. If you knew the difference between having a dream that
stirred the least fibre of your being and facing the world in a demand
for realization of it, and then finding what you coveted in the palm
of your hand, as it were, you would know what is in my heart, and
why expression of some kind is necessary to me just now, and why I'll
explode if it is denied. It will lower the tension, if you will accept
this as a matter of fact; as if you rather expected and liked it, if you
can."

The Harvester set his finger on the spring.

"Don't!" she said. "I'll never have the courage if you do. Give it to me
in the case, and let me open it. Despite your unanswerable arguments, I
am quite sure that is the only way in which I can take it."

The Harvester gave her the box.

"My wedding gift!" she exclaimed, more to herself than to him. "Why
should I be the buffet of all the unkind fates kept in store for a girl
my whole life, and then suddenly be offered home, beautiful gifts, and
wonderful loving kindness by a stranger?"

The Harvester ran his fingers through his crisp hair, pulled it into
a peak, stepped to the seat and sitting on the railing, he lifted his
elbows, tilted his head, and began a motley outpouring of half-spoken,
half-whistled trills and imploring cries. There was enough similarity
that the Girl instantly recognized the red bird. Out of breath the
Harvester dropped to the seat beside her.

"And don't you keep forgetting it!" he cried. "Now open that box and
put on the trinket; because I want to take you to the cabin when the sun
falls level on the drive."

She opened the case, exposing a thread of gold that appeared too slender
for the weight of an exquisite pendant, set with shimmering pearls.

"If you will look down there," the Harvester pointed over the railing to
the arrowhead lilies touched with the fading light, "you will see that
they are similar."

"They are!" cried the Girl. "How lovely! Which is more beautiful I do
not know. And you won't like it if I say I must not."

She held the open case toward the Harvester.

"'Possession is nine points in the law,'" he quoted. "You have taken
it already and it is in your hands; now make the gift perfect for me by
putting it on and saying nothing more."

"My wedding gift!" repeated the Girl. Slowly she lifted the beautiful
ornament and held it in the light. "I'm so glad you just force me to
take it," she said. "Any half-normal girl would be delighted. I do
accept it. And what's more, I am going to keep and wear it and my ring
at suitable times all my life, in memory of what you have done to be
kind to me on this awful day."

"Thank you!" said the Harvester. "That is a flash of the proper spirit.
Allow me to put it on you."

"No!" said the Girl. "Not yet! After a while! I want to hold it in my
hands, where I can see it!"

"Now there is one other thing," said the Harvester.

"If I had known for any length of time that this day was coming and
bringing you, as most men know when a girl is to be given into their
care, I could have made it different. As it is, I've done the best I
knew. All your after life I hope you will believe this: Just that if you
missed anything to-day that would have made it easier for you or more
pleasant, the reason was because of my ignorance of women and the
conventions, and lack of time. I want you to know and to feel that in my
heart those vows I took were real. This is undoubtedly all the marrying
I will ever want to do. I am old-fashioned in my ways, and deeply imbued
with the spirit of the woods, and that means unending evolution along
the same lines.

"To me you are my revered and beloved wife, my mate now; and I am sure
nothing will make me feel any different. This is the day of my marriage
to the only woman I ever have thought of wedding, and to me it is joy
unspeakable. With other men such a day ends differently from the close
of this with me. Because I have done and will continue to do the level
best I know for you, this oration is the prologue to asking you for
one gift to me from you, a wedding gift. I don't want it unless you can
bestow it ungrudgingly, and truly want me to have it. If you can, I will
have all from this day I hope for at the hands of fate. May I have the
gift I ask of you, Ruth?"

She lifted startled eyes to his face.

"Tell me what it is?" she breathed.

"It may seem much to you," said the Harvester; "to me it appears only
a gracious act, from a wonderful woman, if you will give me freely, one
real kiss. I've never had one, save from a Dream Girl, Ruth, and you
will have to make yours pretty good if it is anything like hers. You are
woman enough to know that most men crush their brides in their arms and
take a thousand. I'll put my hands behind me and never move a muscle,
and I won't ask for more, if you will crown my wedding day with only one
touch of your lips. Will you kiss me just once, Ruth?"

The Girl lifted a piteous face down which big tears suddenly rolled.

"Oh Man, you shame me!" she cried. "What kind of a heart have I that it
fails to respond to such a plea? Have I been overworked and starved so
long there is no feeling in me? I don't understand why I don't take you
in my arms and kiss you a hundred times, but you see I don't. It doesn't
seem as if I ever could."

"Never mind," said the Harvester gently. "It was only a fancy of mine,
bred from my dream and unreasonable, perhaps. I am sorry I mentioned it.
The sun is on the stoop now; I want you to enter your home in its light.
Come!"

He half lifted her from the bench. "I am going to help you up the
drive as I used to assist mother," he said, fighting to keep his voice
natural. "Clasp your hands before you and draw your elbows to your
sides. Now let me take one in each palm, and you will scoot up this
drive as if you were on wheels."

"But I don't want to 'scoot'," she said unsteadily. "I must go slowly
and not miss anything."

"On the contrary, you don't want to do any such thing----you should
leave most of it for to-morrow."

"I had forgotten there would be any to-morrow. It seems as if the day
would end it and set me adrift again."

"You are going to awake in the gold room with the sun shining on your
face in the morning, and it's going to keep on all your life. Now if
you've got a smile in your anatomy, bring it to the surface, for just
beyond this tree lies happiness for you."

His voice was clear and steady now, his confidence something contagious.
There was a lovely smile on her face as she looked at him, and stepped
into the line of light crossing the driveway; and then she stopped
and cried, "Oh lovely! Lovely! Lovely!" over and over. Then maybe the
Harvester was not glad he had planned, worked unceasingly, and builded
as well as he knew.

The cabin of large, peeled, golden oak logs, oiled to preserve them,
nestled like a big mushroom on the side of the hill. Above and behind
the building the trees arose in a green setting. The roof was stained
to their shades. The wide veranda was enclosed in screening, over which
wonderful vines climbed in places, and round it grew ferns and deep-wood
plants. Inside hung big baskets of wild growth; there was a wide
swinging seat, with a back rest, supported by heavy chains. There were
chairs and a table of bent saplings and hickory withes. Two full
stories the building arose, and the western sun warmed it almost to
orange-yellow, while the graceful vines crept toward the roof.

The Girl looked at the rapidly rising hedge on each side of her, at the
white floor of the drive, and long and long at the cabin.

"You did all this since February?" she asked.

"Even to transforming the landscape," answered the Harvester.

"Oh I wish it was not coming night!" she cried. "I don't want the dark
to come, until you have told me the name of every tree and shrub of that
wonderful hedge, and every plant and vine of the veranda; and oh I want
to follow up the driveway and see that beautiful little creek--listen
to it chuckle and laugh! Is it always glad like that? See the ferns
and things that grow on the other side of it! Why there are big beds of
them. And lilies of the valley by the acre! What is that yellow around
the corner?"

"Never mind that now," said the Harvester, guiding her up the steps,
along the gravelled walk to the screen that he opened, and over a flood
of gold light she crossed the veranda, and entered the door.

"Now here it appears bare," said the Harvester, "because I didn't know
what should go on the walls or what rugs to get or about the windows.
The table, chairs, and couch I made myself with some help from a
carpenter. They are solid black walnut and will age finely."

"They are beautiful," said the Girl, softly touching the shining table
top with her fingers. "Please put the necklace on me now, I have to use
my eyes and hands for other things."

She held out the box and the Harvester lifted the pendant and clasped
the chain around her neck. She glanced at the lustrous pearls and then
the fingers of one hand softly closed over them. She went through the
long, wide living-room, examining the chairs and mantel, stopping to
touch and exclaim over its array of half-finished candlesticks. At the
door of his room she paused. "And this?" she questioned.

"Mine," said the Harvester, turning the knob. "I'll give you one peep
to satisfy your curiosity, and show you the location of the bridge over
which you came to me in my dream. All the remainder is yours. I reserve
only this."

"Will the 'goblins git me' if I come here?"

"Not goblins, but a man alive; so heed your warning. After you have seen
it, keep away."

The floor was cement, three of the walls heavy screening with mosquito
wire inside, the roof slab shingled. On the inner wall was a bookcase,
below it a desk, at one side a gun cabinet, at the other a bath in a
small alcove beside a closet. The room contained two chairs like those
of the veranda, and the bed was a low oak couch covered with a thick
mattress of hemlock twigs, topped with sweet fern, on which the sun
shone all day. On a chair at the foot were spread some white sheets, a
blanket, and an oilcloth. The sun beat in, the wind drifted through,
and one lying on the couch could see down the bright hill, and sweep the
lake to the opposite bank without lifting the head. The Harvester drew
the Girl to the bedside.

"Now straight in a line from here," he said, "across the lake to that
big, scraggy oak, every clear night the moon builds a bridge of molten
gold, and once you walked it, my girl, and came straight to me, alone
and unafraid; and you were gracious and lovely beyond anything a man
ever dreamed of before. I'll have that to think of to-night. Now come
see the dining-room, kitchen, and hand-made sunshine."

He led her into what had been the front room of the old cabin, now
a large, long dining-room having on each side wide windows with deep
seats. The fireplace backwall was against that of the living-room, but
here the mantel was bare. All the wood-work, chairs, the dining table,
cupboards, and carving table were golden oak. Only a few rugs and
furnishings and a woman's touch were required to make it an unusual and
beautiful room. The kitchen was shining with a white hard-wood floor,
white wood-work, and pale green walls. It was a light, airy, sanitary
place, supplied with a pump, sink, hot and cold water faucets,
refrigerator, and every modern convenience possible to the country.

Then the Harvester almost carried the Girl up the stairs and showed her
three large sleeping rooms, empty and bare save for some packing cases.

"I didn't know about these, so I didn't do anything. When you find
time to plan, tell me what you want, and I'll make--or buy it. They
are good-sized, cool rooms. They all have closets and pipes from the
furnace, so they will be comfortable in winter. Now there is your place
remaining. I'll leave you while I stable Betsy and feed the stock."

He guided her to the door opening from the living-room to the east.

"This is the sunshine spot," he said. "It is bathed in morning light,
and sheltered by afternoon shade. Singing Water is across the drive
there to talk to you always. It comes pelting down so fast it never
freezes, so it makes music all winter, and the birds are so numerous
you'll have to go to bed early for they'll wake you by dawn. I noticed
this room was going to be full of sunshine when I built it, and I craved
only brightness for you, so I coaxed all of it to stay that I could.
Every stroke is the work of my hands, and all of the furniture. I hope
you will like it. This is the room of which I've been telling you, Ruth.
Go in and take possession, and I'll entreat God and all His ministering
angels to send you sunshine and joy."

He opened the door, guided her inside, closed it, and went swiftly to
his work.

The Girl stood and looked around her with amazed eyes. The floor was
pale yellow wood, polished until it shone like a table top. The casings,
table, chairs, dressing table, chest of drawers, and bed were solid
curly maple. The doors were big polished slabs of it, each containing
enough material to veneer all the furniture in the room. The walls
were of plaster, tinted yellow, and the windows with yellow shades were
curtained in dainty white. She could hear the Harvester carrying the
load from the wagon to the front porch, the clamour of the barn yard;
and as she went to the north window to see the view, a shining peacock
strutted down the walk and went to the Harvester's hand for grain, while
scores of snow-white doves circled over his head. She stepped on deep
rugs of yellow goat skins, and, glancing at the windows on either side,
she opened the door.

Outside it lay a porch with a railing, but no roof. On each post stood a
box filled with yellow wood-flowers and trailing vines of pale green.
A big tree rising through one corner of the floor supplied the cover. A
gate opened to a walk leading to the driveway, and on either side lay
a patch of sod, outlined by a deep hedge of bright gold. In it saffron,
cone-flowers, black-eyed Susans, golden-rod, wild sunflowers, and jewel
flower grew, and some of it, enough to form a yellow line, was already
in bloom. Around the porch and down the walk were beds of yellow
violets, pixie moss, and every tiny gold flower of the woods. The Girl
leaned against the tree and looked around her and then staggered inside
and dropped on the couch.

"What planning! What work!" she sobbed. "What taste! Why he's a poet!
What wonderful beauty! He's an artist with earth for his canvas, and
growing things for colours."

She lay there staring at the walls, the beautiful wood-work and
furniture, the dressing table with its array of toilet articles, a
low chair before it, and the thick rug for her feet. Over and over she
looked at everything, and then closed her eyes and lay quietly, too
weary and overwhelmed to think. By and by came tapping at the door, and
she sprang up and crossing to the dressing table straightened her hair
and composed her face.

"Ajax demands to see you," cried a gay voice.

The Girl stepped outside.

"Don't be frightened if he screams at you," warned the Harvester as she
passed him. "He detests a stranger, and he always cries and sulks."

It was a question what was in the head of the bird as he saw the strange
looking creature invading his domain, and he did scream, a wild, high,
strident wail that delighted the Harvester inexpressibly, because it
sent the Girl headlong into his arms.

"Oh, good gracious!" she cried. "Has such a beautiful bird got a noise
in it like that? Why I've fed them in parks and I never heard one
explode before."

Then how the Harvester laughed.

"But you see you are in the woods now, and this is not a park bird. It
will be the test of your power to see how soon you can coax him to your
hand."

"How do I work to win him?"

"I am afraid I can't tell you that," said the Harvester. "I had to
invent a plan for myself. It required a long time and much petting, and
my methods might not avail for you. It will interest you to study that
out. But the member of the family it is positively essential that you
win to a life and death allegiance is Belshazzar. If you can make him
love you, he will protect you at every turn. He will go before you into
the forest and all the crawling, creeping things will get out of his
way. He will nose around the flowers you want to gather, and if he
growls and the hair on the back of his neck rises, never forget that
you must heed that warning. A few times I have not stopped for it, and I
always have been sorry. So far as anything animate or uncertain footing
is concerned, you are always perfectly safe if you obey him. About
touching plants and flowers, you must confine yourself to those you
are certain you know, until I can teach you. There are gorgeous and
wonderfully attractive things here, but some of them are rank poison.
You won't handle plants you don't know, until you learn, Ruth?"

"I will not," she promised instantly.

She went to the seat under the porch tree and leaning against the trunk
she studied the hill, and the rippling course of Singing Water where it
turned and curved before the cabin, and started across the vivid little
marsh toward the lake. Then she looked at the Harvester. He seated
himself on the low railing and smiled at her.

"You are very tired?" he asked.

"No," she said. "You are right about the air being better up here. It is
stimulating instead of depressing."

"So far as pure air, location, and water are concerned," said the
Harvester, "I consider this place ideal. The lake is large enough to
cool the air and raise sufficient moisture to dampen it, and too small
to make it really cold and disagreeable. The <DW72> of the hill gives
perfect drainage. The heaviest rains do not wet the earth for more than
three hours. North, south, and west breezes sweep the cool air from the
water to the cabin in summer. The same suns warm us here on the winter
hillside. My violets, spring beauties, anemones, and dutchman's breeches
here are always two weeks ahead of those in the woods. I am not afraid
of your not liking the location or the air. As for the cabin, if
you don't care for that, it's very simple. I'll transform it into a
laboratory and dry-house, and build you whatever you want, within my
means, over there on the hill just across Singing Water and facing
the valley toward Onabasha. That's a perfect location. The thing that
worries me is what you are going to do for company, especially while I
am away."

"Don't trouble yourself about anything," she said. "Just say in your
heart, 'she is going to be stronger than she ever has been in her life
in this lovely place, and she has more right now than she ever had or
hoped to have.' For one thing, I am going to study your books. I never
have had time before. While we sewed or embroidered, mother talked by
the hour of the great writers of the world, told me what they wrote,
and how they expressed themselves, but I got to read very little for
myself."

"Books are my company," said the Harvester.

"Do your friends come often?"

"Almost never! Doc and his wife come most, and if you look out some day
and see a white-haired, bent old woman, with a face as sweet as dawn,
coming up the bank of Singing Water, that will be my mother's friend,
Granny Moreland, who joins us on the north over there. She is frank and
brusque, so she says what she thinks with unmistakable distinctness,
but her heart is big and tender and her philosophy keeps her sweet and
kindly despite the ache of rheumatism and the weight of seventy years."

"I'd love to have her come," said the Girl. "Is that all?"

"Yes."

"Why?"

"Your favourite word," laughed the Harvester. "The reason lies with me,
or rather with my mother. Some day I will tell you the whole story,
and the cause. I think now I can encompass it in this. The place is an
experiment. When medicinal herbs, roots, and barks became so scarce that
some of the most important were almost extinct, it occurred to me that
it would be a good idea to stop travelling miles and poaching on the
woods of other people, and turn our land into an herb garden. For four
years before mother went, and six since, I've worked with all my might,
and results are beginning to take shape. While I've been at it, of
course, my neighbours had an inkling of what was going on, and I've been
called a fool, lazy, and a fanatic, because I did not fell the trees and
plow for corn. You readily can see I'm a little short of corn ground out
there," he waved toward the marsh and lake, "and up there," he indicated
the steep hill and wood. "But somewhere on this land I've been able to
find muck for mallows, water for flags and willows, shade for ferns,
lilies, and ginseng, rocky, sunny spaces for mullein, and open, fertile
beds for Bouncing Bet----just for examples. God never evolved a place
better suited for an herb farm; from woods to water and all that goes
between, it is perfect."

"And indescribably lovely," added the Girl.

"Yes, I think it is," said the Harvester. "But in the days when I didn't
know how it was coming out, I was sensitive about it; so I kept quiet
and worked, and allowed the other fellow to do the talking. After a
while the ginseng bed grew a treasure worth guarding, and I didn't
care for any one to know how much I had or where it was, as a matter
of precaution. Ginseng and money are synonymous, and I was forced to be
away some of the time."

"Would any one take it?"

"Certainly!" said the Harvester. "If they knew it was there, and what
it is worth. Then, as I've told you, much of the stuff here must not be
handled except by experts, and I didn't want people coming in my absence
and taking risks. The remainder of my reason for living so alone is
cowardice, pure and simple."

"Cowardice? You! Oh no!"

"Thank you!" said the Harvester. "But it is! Some day I'll tell you of
a very solemn oath I've had to keep. It hasn't been easy. You wouldn't
understand, at least not now. If the day ever comes when I think you
will, I'll tell you. Just now I can express it by that one word. I
didn't dare fail or I felt I would be lost as my father was before me.
So I remained away from the city and its temptations and men of my age,
and worked in the woods until I was tired enough to drop, read books
that helped, tinkered with the carving, and sometimes I had an idea,
and I went into that little building behind the dry-house, took out my
different herbs, and tried my hand at compounding a new cure for some of
the pains of humanity. It isn't bad work, Ruth. It keeps a fellow at
a fairly decent level, and some good may come of it. Carey is trying
several formulae for me, and if they work I'll carry them higher. If you
want money, Girl, I know how to get it for you."

"Don't you want it?"

"Not one cent more than I've got," said the Harvester emphatically.
"When any man accumulates more than he can earn with his own hands, he
begins to enrich himself at the expense of the youth, the sweat, the
blood, the joy of his fellow men. I can go to the city, take a look, and
see what money does, as a rule, and it's another thing I'm afraid of.
You will find me a dreadful coward on those two points. I don't want to
know society and its ways. I see what it does to other men; it would be
presumption to reckon myself stronger. So I live alone. As for money,
I've watched the cross cuts and the quick and easy ways to accumulate
it; but I've had something in me that held me to the slow, sure, clean
work of my own hands, and it's yielded me enough for one, for two even,
in a reasonable degree. So I've worked, read, compounded, and carved. If
I couldn't wear myself down enough to sleep by any other method, I went
into the lake, and swam across and back; and that is guaranteed to put
any man to rest, clean and unashamed."

"Six years," said the Girl softly, as she studied him. "I think it has
set a mark on you. I believe I can trace it. Your forehead, brow,
and eyes bear the lines and the appearance of all experience, all
comprehension, but your lips are those of a very young lad. I shouldn't
be surprised if I had that kiss ready for you, and I really believe I
can make it worth while."

"Oh good Lord!" cried the Harvester, turning a backward somersault over
the railing and starting in big bounds up the drive toward the stable.
He passed around it and into the woods at a rush and a few seconds later
from somewhere on the top of the hill his strong, deep voice swept down,
"Glory, glory hallelujah!"

He sang it through at the top of his lungs, that majestic old hymn,
but there was no music at all, it was simply a roar. By and by he came
soberly to the barn and paused to stroke Betsy's nose.

"Stop chewing grass and listen to me," he said. "She's here, Betsy!
She's in our cabin. She's going to remain, you can stake your oats
on that. She's going to be the loveliest and sweetest girl in all the
world, and because you're a beast, I'll tell you something a man never
could know. Down with your ear, you critter! She's going to kiss me,
Betsy! This very night, before I lay me, her lips meet mine, and maybe
you think that won't be glorious. I supposed it would be a year, anyway,
but it's now! Ain't you glad you are an animal, Betsy, and can keep
secrets for a fool man that can't?"

He walked down the driveway, and before the Girl had a chance to speak,
he said, "I wonder if I had not better carry those things into your
room, and arrange your bed for you."

"I can," she said.

"Oh no!" exclaimed the Harvester. "You can't lift the mattress and heavy
covers. Hold the door and tell me how."

He laid a big bundle on the floor, opened it, and took out the shoes.

"Your shoe box is in the closet there."

"I didn't know what that door was, so I didn't open it."

"That is a part of my arrangements for you," said the Harvester. "Here
is a closet with shelves for your covers and other things. They are bare
because I didn't know just what should be put on them. This is the shoe
box here in the corner; I'll put these in it now."

He knelt and in a row set the shoes in the curly maple box and closed
it.

"There you are for all kinds of places and varieties of weather.
This adjoining is your bathroom. I put in towels, soaps; brushes,
and everything I could think of, and there is hot water ready for
you----rain water, too."

The Girl followed and looked into a shining little bathroom, with its
white porcelain tub and wash bowl, enamelled wood-work, dainty green
walls, and white curtains and towels. She could see no accessory she
knew of that was missing, and there were many things to which she never
had been accustomed. The Harvester had gone back to the sunshine room,
and was kneeling on the floor beside the bundle. He began opening boxes
and handing her dresses.

"There are skirt, coat, and waist hangers on the hooks," he said. "I
only got a few things to start on, because I didn't know what you would
like. Instead of being so careful with that dress, why don't you take it
off, and put on a common one? Then we will have something to eat, and go
to the top of the hill and watch the moon bridge the lake."

While she hung the dresses and selected the one to wear, he placed the
mattress, spread the padding and sheets, and encased the pillow. Then he
bent and pressed the springs with his hands.

"I think you will find that soft and easy enough for health," he said.
"All the personal belongings I had that clerk put up for you are in that
chest of drawers there. I put the little boxes in the top and went down.
You can empty and arrange them to-morrow. Just hunt out what you will
need now. There should be everything a girl uses there somewhere. I told
them to be very careful about that. If the things are not right or not
to your taste, you can take them back as soon as you are rested, and
they will exchange them for you. If there is anything I have missed that
you can think of that you need to-night, tell me and I'll go and get
it."

The Girl turned toward him.

"You couldn't be making sport of me," she said, "but Man! Can't you see
that I don't know what to do with half you have here? I never saw such
things closely before. I don't know what they are for. I don't know how
to use them. My mother would have known, but I do not. You overwhelm me!
Fifty times I've tried to tell you that a room of my very own, such
a room as this will be when to-morrow's sun comes in, and these, and
these, and these," she turned from the chest of boxes to the dressing
table, bed, closet, and bath, "all these for me, and you know absolutely
nothing about me----I get a big lump in my throat, and the words that
do come all seem so meaningless, I am perfectly ashamed to say them. Oh
Man, why do you do it?"

"I thought it was about time to spring another 'why' on me," said the
Harvester. "Thank God, I am now in a position where I can tell you
'why'! I do it because you are the girl of my dream, my mate by every
law of Heaven and earth. All men build as well as they know when the one
woman of the universe lays her spell on them. I did all this for myself
just as a kind of expression of what it would be in my heart to do if I
could do what I'd like. Put on the easiest dress you can find and I will
go and set out something to eat."

She stood with arms high piled with the prettiest dresses that could be
selected hurriedly, the tears running down her white cheeks and smiled
through them at him.

"There wouldn't be any of that liquid amber would there?" she asked.

"Quarts!" cried the Harvester. "I'll bring some. ... Does it really hit
the spot, Ruth?" he questioned as he handed her the glass.

She heaped the dresses on the bed and took it.

"It really does. I am afraid I am using too much."

"I don't think it possibly can hurt you. To-morrow we will ask Doc. How
soon will you be ready for lunch?"

"I don't want a bite."

"You will when you see and smell it," said the Harvester. "I am an
expert cook. It's my chiefest accomplishment. You should taste the
dishes I improvise. But there won't be much to-night, because I want you
to see the moon rise over the lake."

He went away and the Girl removed her dress and spread it on the couch.
Then she bathed her face and hands. When she saw the discoloured cloth,
it proved that she had been painted, and made her very indignant. Yet
she could not be altogether angry, for that flush of colour had saved
the Harvester from being pitied by his friend. She stood a long time
before the mirror, staring at her gaunt, colourless face; then she went
to the dressing table and committed a crime. She found a box of cream
and rubbed it on for a foundation. Then she opened some pink powder, and
carefully dusted her cheeks.

"I am utterly ashamed," she said to the image in the mirror, "but he
has done so much for me, he is so, so----I don't know a word big
enough----that I can't bear him to see how ghastly I am, how little
worth it. Perhaps the food, better air, and outdoor exercise will give
me strength and colour soon. Until it does I'm afraid I'm going to help
out all I can with this. It is wonderful how it changes one. I really
appear like a girl instead of a bony old woman."

Then she looked over the dresses, selected a pretty white princesse,
slipped it on, and went to the kitchen. But the Harvester would not
have her there. He seated her at the dining table, beside the window
overlooking the lake, lighted a pair of his home-made candles in his
finest sticks, and placed before her bread, butter, cold meat, milk, and
fruit, and together they ate their first meal in their home.

"If I had known," said the Harvester, "Granny Moreland is a famous cook.
She is a Southern woman, and she can fry chicken and make some especial
dishes to surpass any one I ever knew. She would have been so pleased to
come over and get us an all-right supper."

"I'd much rather have this, and be by ourselves," said the Girl.

"Well, you can bank on it, I would," agreed the Harvester. "For
instance, if any one were here, I might feel restrained about telling
you that you are exactly the beautiful, flushed Dream Girl I have adored
for months, and your dress most becoming. You are a picture to blind the
eyes of a lonely bachelor, Ruth."

"Oh why did you say that?" wailed the Girl. "Now I've got to feel like a
sneak or tell you----and I didn't want you to know."

"Don't you ever tell me or any one else anything you don't want to,"
said the Harvester roundly. "It's nobody's business!"

"But I must! I can't begin with deception. I was fool enough to think
you wouldn't notice. Man, they painted me! I didn't know they were doing
it, but when it all washed off, I looked so ghastly I almost frightened
myself. I hunted through the boxes they put up for you and found some
pink powder----"

"But don't all the daintiest women powder these days, and consider it
indispensable? The clerk said so, and I've noticed it mentioned in the
papers. I bought it for you to use."

"Yes, just powder, but Man, I put on a lot of cold cream first to stick
the powder good and thick. Oh I wish I hadn't!"

"Well since you've told it, is your conscience perfectly at ease? No
you don't! You sit where you are! You are lovely, and if you don't use
enough powder to cover the paleness, until your colour returns, I'll
hold you and put it on. I know you feel better when you appear so that
every one must admire you."

"Yes, but I'm a fraud!"

"You are no such thing!" cried the Harvester hotly. "There hasn't a
woman in ten thousand got any such rope of hair. I have been seeing the
papers on the hair question, too. No one will believe it's real. If they
think your hair is false, when it is natural, they won't be any more
fooled when they think your colour is real, and it isn't. Very soon it
will be and no one need ever know the difference. You go on and fix up
your level best. To see yourself appearing well will make you ambitious
to become so as soon as possible."

"Harvester-man," said the Girl, gazing at him with wet luminous eyes,
"for the sake of other women, I could wish that all men had an oath to
keep, and had been reared in the woods."

"Here is the place we adjourn to the moon," cried the Harvester. "I
don't know of anything that can cure a sudden accession of swell
head like gazing at the heavens. One finds his place among the atoms
naturally and instantaneously with the eyes on the night sky. Should
you have a wrap? You should! The mists from the lake are cool. I don't
believe there is one among my orders. I forgot that. But upstairs with
mother's clothing there are several shawls and shoulder capes. All of
them were washed and carefully packed. Would you use one, Ruth?"

"Why not give it to me. Wouldn't she like me to wear her things better
than to have them lying in moth balls?"

The Harvester looked at her and shook his head, marvelling.

"I can't tell how pleased she would be," he said.

"Where are her belongings?" asked the Girl. "I could use them to help
furnish the house, and it wouldn't appear so strange to you."

The Harvester liked that.

"All the washed things are in those boxes upstairs; also some fine skins
I've saved on the chance of wanting them. Her dishes are in the bottom
of the china closet there; she was mighty proud of them. The furniture
and carpets were so old and abused I burned them. I'll go bring a wrap."

He took the candle and climbed the stairs, soon returning with a little
white wool shawl and a big pink coverlet.

"Got this for her Christmas one time," he said. "She'd never had a white
one and she thought it was pretty."

He folded it around the Girl's shoulders and picked up the coverlet.

"You're never going to take that to the woods!" she cried.

"Why not?"

She took it in her hands to find a corner.

"Just as I thought! It's a genuine Peter Hartman! It's one of the things
that money can't buy, or, rather, one that takes a mint of money to own.
They are heirlooms. They are not manufactured any more. At the art store
where I worked they'd give you fifty dollars for that. It is not faded
or worn a particle. It would be lovely in my room; you mustn't take a
treasure like that out of doors."

"Ruth, are you in earnest?" demanded the Harvester. "I believe there are
six of them upstairs."

"Plutocrat!" cried the Girl. "What colours?"

"More of this pinkish red, blue, and pale green."

"Famous! May I have them to help furnish with to-morrow?"

"Certainly! Anything you can find, any way on earth you want it, only
in my room. That is taboo, as I told you. What am I going to take
to-night?"

"Isn't the rug you had in the woods in the wagon yet? Use that!"

"Of course! The very thing! Bel, proceed!"

"Are you going to leave the house like this?"

"Why not?"

"Suppose some one breaks in!"

"Nothing worth carrying away, except what you have on. No one to get in.
There is a big swamp back of our woods, marsh in front, we're up here
where we can see the drive and bridge. There is nothing possible from
any direction. Never locked the cabin in my life, except your room, and
that was because it was sacred, not that there was any danger. Clear the
way, Bel!"

"Clear it of what?"

"Katydids, hoptoads, and other carnivorous animals."

"Now you are making fun of me! Clear it of what?"

"A <DW53> that might go shuffling across, an opossum, or a snake going to
the lake. Now are you frightened so that you will not go?"

"No. The path is broad and white and surely you and Bel can take care of
me."

"If you will trust us we can."

"Well, I am trusting you."

"You are indeed," said the Harvester. "Now see if you think this is
pretty."

He indicated the hill sloping toward the lake. The path wound among
massive trees, between whose branches patches of moonlight filtered.
Around the lake shore and climbing the hill were thickets of bushes.
The water lay shining in the light, a gentle wind ruffled the surface
in undulant waves, and on the opposite bank arose the line of big
trees. Under a giant oak widely branching, on the top of the hill, the
Harvester spread the rug and held one end of it against the tree trunk
to protect the Girl's dress. Then he sat a little distance away and
began to talk. He mingled some sense with a quantity of nonsense, and
appreciated every hint of a laugh he heard. The day had been no amusing
matter for a girl absolutely alone among strange people and scenes.
Anything more foreign to her previous environment or expectations he
could not imagine. So he talked to prevent her from thinking, and worked
for a laugh as he laboured for bread.

"Now we must go," he said at last. "If there is the malaria I strongly
suspect in your system, this night air is none too good for you. I only
wanted you to see the lake the first night in your new home, and if it
won't shock you, I brought you here because this is my holy of holies.
Can you guess why I wanted you to come, Ruth?"

"If I wasn't so stupid with alternate burning and chills, and so
deadened to every proper sensibility, I suppose I could," she answered,
"but I'm not brilliant. I don't know, unless it is because you knew it
would be the loveliest place I ever saw. Surely there is no other spot
in the world quite so beautiful."

"Then would it seem strange to you," asked the Harvester going to the
Girl and gently putting his arms around her, "would it seem strange to
you, that a woman who once homed here and thought it the prettiest place
on earth, chose to remain for her eternal sleep, rather than to rest in
a distant city of stranger dead?"

He felt the Girl tremble against him.

"Where is she?"

"Very close," said the Harvester. "Under this oak. She used to say that
she had a speaking acquaintance with every tree on our land, and of them
all she loved this big one the best. She liked to come here in winter,
and feel the sting of the wind sweeping across the lake, and in summer
this was her place to read and to think. So when she slept the unwaking
sleep, Ruth, I came here and made her bed with my own hands, and then
carried her to it, covered her, and she sleeps well. I never have
regretted her going. Life did not bring her joy. She was very tired.
She used to say that after her soul had fled, if I would lay her here,
perhaps the big roots would reach down and find her, and from her frail
frame gather slight nourishment and then her body would live again in
talking leaves that would shelter me in summer and whisper her love in
winter. Of all Medicine Woods this is the dearest spot to me. Can you
love it too, Ruth?"

"Oh I can!" cried the Girl; "I do now! Just to see the place and hear
that is enough. I wish, oh to my soul I wish----"

"You wish what?" whispered the Harvester gently.

"I dare not! I was wild to think of it. I would be ungrateful to ask
it."

"You would be ungracious if you didn't ask anything that would give
me the joy of pleasing you. How long is it going to require for you
to learn, Ruth, that to make up for some of the difficulties life has
brought you would give me more happiness than anything else could? Tell
me now."

"No!"

He gathered her closer.

"Ruth, there is no reason why you should be actively unkind to me. What
is it you wish?"

She struggled from his arms and stood alone in white moonlight, staring
across the lake, along the shore, deep into the perfumed forest, and
then at the mound she now could distinguish under the giant tree.
Suddenly she went to him and with both shaking hands gripped his arm.

"My mother!" she panted. "Oh she was a beautiful woman, delicately
reared, and her heart was crushed and broken. By the inch she went to
a dreadful end I could not avert or allay, and in poverty and grime I
fought for a way to save her body from further horror, and it's all so
dreadful I thought all feeling in me was dried and still, but I am not
quite calloused yet. I suffer it over with every breath. It is never
entirely out of my mind. Oh Man, if only you would lift her from the
horrible place she lies, where briers run riot and cattle trample and
the unmerciful sun beats! Oh if only you'd lift her from it, and bring
her here! I believe it would take away some of the horror, the shame,
and the heartache. I believe I could go to sleep without hearing the
voice of her suffering, if I knew she was lying on this hill, under your
beautiful tree, close the dear mother you love. Oh Man, would you----?"

The Harvester crushed the Girl in his arms and shuddering sobs shook his
big frame, and choked his voice.

"Ruth, for God's sake, be quiet!" he cried. "Why I'd be glad to! I'll go
anywhere you tell me, and bring her, and she shall rest where the lake
murmurs, the trees shelter, the winds sing, and earth knows the sun only
in long rays of gold light."

She stared at him with strained face.

"You----you wouldn't!" she breathed.

"Ruth, child," said the Harvester, "I tell you I'd be happy. Look at
my side of this! I'm in search of bands to bind you to me and to this
place. Could you tell me a stronger than to have the mother you idolized
lie here for her long sleep? Why Girl, you can't know the deep and
abiding joy it would give me to bring her. I'd feel I had you almost
secure. Where is she Ruth?"

"In that old unkept cemetery south of Onabasha, where it costs no money
to lay away your loved ones."

"Close here! Why I'll go to-morrow! I supposed she was in the city."

She straightened and drew away from him.

"How could I? I had nothing. I could not have paid even her fare and
brought her here in the cheapest box the decency of man would allow
him to make if her doctor had not given me the money I owe. Now do
you understand why I must earn and pay it myself? Save for him, it was
charity or her delicate body to horrors. Money never can repay him."

"Ruth, the day you came to Onabasha was she with you?"

"In the express car," said the Girl.

"Where did you go when you left the train shed?"

"Straight to the baggage room, where Uncle Henry was waiting. Men
brought and put her in his wagon, and he drove with me to the place and
other men lowered her, and that was all."

"You poor Girl!" cried the Harvester. "This time to-morrow night she
shall sleep in luxury under this oak, so help me God! Ruth, can you
spare me? May I go at once? I can't rest, myself."

"You will?" cried the Girl. "You will?"

She was laughing in the moonlight. "Oh Man, I can't ever, ever tell
you!"

"Don't try," said the Harvester. "Call it settled. I will start early
in the morning. I know that little cemetery. The man whose land it is
on can point me the spot. She is probably the last one laid there. Come
now, Ruth. Go to the room I made for you, and sleep deeply and in peace.
Will you try to rest?"

"Oh David!" she exulted. "Only think! Here where it's clean and cool;
beside the lake, where leaves fall gently and I can come and sit close
to her and bring flowers; and she never will be alone, for your dear
mother is here. Oh David!"

"It is better. I can't thank you enough for thinking of it. Come now,
let me help you."

He half carried her down the hill. Then he made the cabin a glamour of
light by putting candles in the sticks he had carved and placing them
everywhere.

"There is a lighting plant in the basement," he said, "but I had not
expected to use it until winter, and I have no acetylene. Candles were
our grandmothers' lights and they are the best anyway. Go bathe your
face, Ruth, and wash away all trace of tears. Put on the pink powder,
and in a few weeks you will have colour to outdo the wildest rose. You
must be as gay as you can the remainder of this night."

"I will!" cried the Girl. "I will! Oh I didn't know a thing on earth
could make me happy! I didn't know I really could be glad. Oh if the ice
in my heart would melt, and the wall break down, and the girlhood I've
never known would come yet! Oh David, if it would!"

"Before the Lord it shall!" vowed the Harvester. "It shall come with the
fulness of joy right here in Medicine Woods. Think it! Believe it! Keep
it before you! Work for it! Happiness is worth while! All of us have a
right to it! It shall be yours and soon."

"I will try! I will!" promised the Girl. "I'll go right now and I'll put
on the blessed pink powder so thickly you'll never know what is under
it, and soon it won't be needed at all."

She was laughing as she left the room. The Harvester restlessly walked
the floor a few minutes and then sat with a notebook and began entering
stems.

When the Girl returned, he brought the pillow from her bed, folded the
coverlet, and she lay on them in the big swing. He covered her with the
white shawl, and while Singing Water sang its loudest, katydids exulted
over the delightful act of their ancestor, and a million gauze-winged
creatures of night hummed against the screen, in a voice soft and low he
told her in a steady stream, as he swayed her back and forth, what each
sound of the night was, and how and why it was made all the way from the
rumbling buzz of the June bug to the screech of the owl and the splash
of the bass in the lake. All of it, as it appealed to him, was the story
of steady evolution, the natural processes of reproduction, the joy of
life and its battles, and the conquest of the strong in nature. At his
hands every sound was stripped of terror. The leaping bass was exulting
in life, the screeching owl was telling its mate it had found a fat
mouse for the children, the nighthawk was courting, the big bull frogs
booming around the lake were serenading the moon. There was not a thing
to fear or a voice left with an unsympathetic note in it. She was half
asleep when at last he helped her to her room, set a pitcher of frosty,
clinking drink on her table, locked her door and window screens inside,
spread Belshazzar's blanket on her porch, and set his door wide open,
that he might hear if she called, and then said good night and went back
to his memorandum book.

"No bad beginning," he muttered softly, "no bad beginning, but I'd
almost give my right hand if she hadn't forgotten----"

In her room the exhausted Girl slipped the pins from her hair and sank
on the low chair before the dressing-table. She picked up the shining,
silver backed brush and stared at the monogram, R. F. L, entwined on it.

"My soul!" she exclaimed. "WAS HE SO SURE AS THAT? Was there ever any
other man like him?"

She dropped the brush and with tired hands pushed back the heavy braids.
Then she arose and going to the chest of drawers began lifting lids to
find a night robe. As she searched the boxes she found every dainty,
pretty undergarment a girl ever used and at last the robes. She shook
out a long white one, slipped into it, and walked to the bed. That stood
as he had arranged it, white, clean, and dainty.

"Everything for me!" she said softly. "Everything for me! Shall there be
nothing for him? Oh he makes it easy, easy!"

She stepped to the closet, picked down a lavender silk kimona and
drawing it over her gown she gathered it around her and opening
the bathroom door, she stepped into a little hall leading to the
dining-room. As she entered the living-room the Harvester bent over his
book. Her step was very close when he heard it and turned his head. In
an instant she touched his shoulders. The Harvester dropped the pencil,
and palm downward laid his hands on the table, his promise strong in
his heart. The Girl slid a shaking palm under his chin, leaned his head
against her breast, and dropped a sweet, tear-wet face on his. With all
the strength of her frail arms she gripped him a second, and then gave
the kiss, into which she tried to put all she could find no words to
express.



CHAPTER XIV. SNOWY WINGS

The Harvester sat at the table in deep thoughts until the lights in the
Girl's room were darkened and everything was quiet. Then he locked
the screens inside and went into the night. The moon flooded all the
hillside, until coarse print could have been read with keen eyes in its
light. A restlessness, born of exultation he could not allay or control,
was on him. She had not forgotten! After this, the dream would be
effaced by reality. It was the beginning. He scarcely had dared hope for
so much. Surely it presaged the love with which she some day would
come to him and crown his life. He walked softly up and down the drive,
passing her windows, unable to think of sleep. Over and over he dwelt on
the incidents of the day, so inevitably he came to his promise.

"Merciful Heaven!" he muttered. "How can such things happen? The poor,
overworked, tired, suffering girl. It will give her some comfort. She
will feel better. It has to be done. I believe I will do the worst part
of it while she sleeps."

He went to the cabin, crept very close to one of her windows and
listened intently. Surely no mortal awake could lie motionless so long.
She must be sleeping. He patted Belshazzar, whispered, "Watch, boy,
watch for your life!" and then crossed to the dry-house. Beside it he
found a big roll of coffee sacks that he used in collecting roots, and
going to the barn, he took a spade and mattock. Then he climbed the hill
to the oak; in the white moonlight laid off his measurements and began
work. His heart was very tender as he lifted the earth, and threw it
into the tops of the big bags he had propped open.

"I'll line it with a couple of sheets and finish the edge with pond
lilies and ferns," he planned, "and I'll drag this earth from sight, and
cover it with brush until I need it."

Sometimes he paused in his work to rest a few minutes and then he stood
and glanced around him. Several times he went down the hill and slipped
close to a window, but he could not hear a sound. When his work was
finished, he stood before the oak, scraping clinging earth from the
mattock with which he had cut roots he had been compelled to remove.
He was tired now and he thought he would go to his room and sleep until
daybreak. As he turned the implement he remembered how through it he
had found her, and now he was using it in her service. He smiled as he
worked, and half listened to the steady roll of sound encompassing him.
A cool breath swept from the lake and he wondered if it found her wet,
hot cheek. A wild duck in the rushes below gave an alarm signal, and
it ran in subdued voice, note by note, along the shore. The Harvester
gripped the mattock and stood motionless. Wild things had taught him so
many lessons he heeded their warnings instinctively. Perhaps it was a
mink or muskrat approaching the rushes. Listening intently, he heard a
stealthy step coming up the path behind him.

The Harvester waited. He soundlessly moved around the trunk of the big
tree. An instant more the night prowler stopped squarely at the head of
the open grave, and jumped back with an oath. He stood tense a second,
then advanced, scratched a match and dropped it into the depths of the
opening. That instant the Harvester recognized Henry Jameson, and with
a spring landed between the man's shoulders and sent him, face down,
headlong into the grave. He snatched one of the sacks of earth, and
tipping it, gripped the bottom and emptied the contents on the head
and shoulders of the prostrate man. Then he dropped on him and feeling
across his back took an ugly, big revolver from a pocket. He swung to
the surface and waited until Henry Jameson crawled from under the weight
of earth and began to rise; then, at each attempt, he knocked him down.
At last he caught the exhausted man by the collar and dragged him to the
path, where he dropped him and stood gloating.

"So!" he said; "It's you! Coming to execute your threat, are you? What's
the matter with my finishing you, loading your carcass with a few stones
into this sack, and dropping you in the deepest part of the lake."

There was no reply.

"Ain't you a little hasty?" asked the Harvester. "Isn't it rather cold
blooded to come sneaking when you thought I'd be asleep? Don't you think
it would be low down to kill a man on his wedding day?"

Henry Jameson arose cautiously and faced the Harvester.

"Who have you killed?" he panted.

"No one," answered the Harvester. "This is for the victim of a member of
your family, but I never dreamed I'd have the joy of planting any of
you in it first, even temporarily. Did you rest well? What I should have
done was to fill in, tread down, and leave you at the bottom."

Jameson retreated a few steps. The Harvester laughed and advanced the
same distance.

"Now then," he said, "explain what you are doing on my premises, a few
hours after your threat, and armed with another revolver before I could
return the one I took from you this afternoon. You must grow them on
bushes at your place, they seem so numerous. Speak up! What are you
doing here?"

There was no answer.

"There are three things it might be," mused the Harvester. "You might
think to harm me, but you're watched on that score and I don't believe
you'd enjoy the result sure to follow. You might contemplate trying to
steal Ruth's money again, but we'll pass that up. You might want to go
through my woods to inform yourself as to what I have of value there.
But, in all prob-ability, you are after me. Well, here I am. Go ahead!
Do what you came to!"

The Harvester stepped toward the lake bank and Jameson, turning to watch
him, exposed a face ghastly through its grime.

"Look here!" cried the Harvester, sickening. "We will end this right
now. I was rather busy this afternoon, but I wasn't too hurried to take
that little weapon of yours to the chief of police and tell him where
and how I got it and what occurred. He was to return it to you
to-morrow with his ultimatum. When I have added the history of to-night,
reinforced by another gun, he will understand your intentions and know
where you belong. You should be confined, but because your name is the
same as the Girl's, and there is of your blood in her veins, I'll give
you one more chance. I'll let you go this time, but I'll report you, and
deliver this implement to be added to your collection at headquarters.
And I tell you, and I'll tell them, that if ever I find you on my
premises again, I'll finish you on sight. Is that clear?"

Jameson nodded.

"What I should do is to plump you squarely into confinement, as I could
easily enough, but that's not my way. I am going to let you off, but you
go knowing the law. One thing more: Don't leave with any distorted ideas
in your head. I saw Ruth the day she stepped from the cars in Onabasha
and I loved her. I wanted to court and marry her, as any man would the
girl he loves, but you spoiled that with your woman killing brutality.
So I married her in Onabasha this afternoon. You can see the records at
the county clerk's office and interview the minister who performed the
ceremony, if you doubt me. Ruth is in her room, comfortable as I can
make her, asleep and unafraid, thank God! This grave is for her mother.
The Girl wants her lifted from the horrible place you put her, and laid
where it is sheltered and pleasant. Now, I'll see you off my land. Hurry
yourself!"

With the Harvester following, Henry Jameson went back over the path he
had come, until he reached and mounted the horse he had ridden. As the
Harvester watched him, Jameson turned in the saddle and spoke for the
second time.

"What will you give me in cold cash to tell you who she is, and where
her mother's people are?"

The Harvester leaped for the bridle and missed. Jameson bent over
the horse and lashed it to a run. Half way to the oak the Harvester
remembered the revolver, but being unaccustomed to weapons, he had
forgotten it when he needed it most. He replaced the earth in the sack
and dragged it away, then plunged into the lake, and afterward went
to bed, where he slept soundly until dawn. First, he slipped into the
living-room and wrote a note to the Girl. Then he fed Belshazzar and ate
a hearty breakfast. He stationed the dog at her door, gave him the
note, and went to the oak. There he arranged everything neatly and as
he desired, and then hitching Betsy he quietly guided her down the drive
and over the road to Onabasha. He went to an undertaking establishment,
made all his arrangements, and then called up and talked with the
minister who had performed the marriage ceremony the previous day.

The sun shining in her face awoke Ruth and she lay revelling in the
light. "Maybe it will colour me faster than the powder," she thought.
"How peculiar for him to say what he did! I always thought men detested
it. But he is not like any one else." She lay looking around the
beautiful room and wondering where the Harvester was. She could not hear
him. Then, slowly and painfully, she dragged her aching limbs from the
bed and went to the door. The dog was gone from the porch and she could
not see the man at the stable. She selected a frock and putting it on
opened the door. Belshazzar arose and offered this letter:

DEAR RUTH:

I have gone to keep my promise. You are locked in with Bel. Please obey
me and do not step outside the door until four o'clock. Then put on a
pretty white dress, and with the dog, come to the bridge to meet me. I
hope you will not suffer and fret. Put away your clothing, arrange the
rooms to keep busy, or better yet, lie in the swing and rest. There is
food in the ice chest, pantry, and cellar. Forgive me for leaving you
to-day, but I thought you would feel easier to have this over. I am so
glad to bring your mother here. I hope it will make you happy enough
to meet us with a smile. Do not forget the pink box until the reality
comes.

With love,

DAVID.


The Girl went to the kitchen and found food. She offered to share with
Belshazzar, but she could see from his indifference he was not hungry.
Then she returned to the room flooded with light, and filled with
treasures, and tried to decide how she would arrange her clothing. She
spent hours opening boxes and putting dainty, pretty garments in the
drawers, hanging the dresses, and placing the toilet articles. Often
she wearily dropped to the chairs and couches, or gazed from door and
windows at the pictures they framed. "I wonder why he doesn't want me to
go outside," she thought. "I wouldn't be afraid in the least, with Bel.
I'd just love to go across to that wonderful little river of Singing
Water and sit in the shade; but I won't open the door until four
o'clock, just as he wrote."

When she thought of where he had gone, and why, the swift tears filled
her eyes, but she forced them back and resolutely went to investigate
the dining-room. Then for two hours she was a home builder, with a touch
of that homing instinct found in the heart of every good woman. First,
she looked where the Harvester had said the dishes were, and suddenly
sat on the floor exulting. There was a quantity of old chipped and
cracked white ware and some gorgeous baking powder prizes; but there
were also big blue, green, and pink bowls, several large lustre plates,
and a complete tea set without chip or blemish, two beautiful pitchers,
and a number of willow pieces. She set the green bowl on the dining
table, the blue on the living-room, and took the pink herself, while a
beautiful yellow one she placed in the dining-room window seat.

"Oh, if I only dared fill them with those lovely flowers!" She stood in
the window and gazed longingly toward the lake. "I know what colour I'd
like to put in each of them," she said, "but I promised not to touch
anything, and the ones I want most I never saw before, and I'm not to go
out anyway. I can't see the sense in that, when I'm not at all afraid,
but if he does this wonderful thing for me I must do what he asks. Oh
mother, mother! Are you really coming to this beautiful place and to
rest at last?"

She sank to the window seat and lay trembling, but she bravely
restrained the tears. After a time she remembered the upstairs and went
to see the coverlets. She found a half dozen beautiful ones, and smiled
as she examined the stiffly conventionalized birds facing each other in
the border designs, and in one corner of each blanket she read, woven in
the cloth----

     Peter and John
        Hartman
        Wooster
         Ohio
         1837

She took a blue and a green one, several fine skins from the fur box the
Harvester had told her about, and went downstairs. It required all her
strength to push the heavy tables before the fireplaces. She spread
papers on them to stand on, and tacked a skin above each mantel. She set
all of the candlesticks, except those she wanted to use, in the lower
part of an empty bookcase. A pair of black walnut she placed on the
living-room mantel, together with a big blue plate, a yellow one, and an
old brass candlestick. She admired the effect very much. She spread the
blue coverlet on the couch, and arranged the blue bowl and some books on
the table. Here and there she hung a skin across a chair back, or
spread it in a wide window seat. Having exhausted all her resources, she
returned to the dining-room, spread a skin before the hearth and in each
window seat, set a pink and green lustre plate on the mantel, and a pair
of oak candlesticks, and arranged the lustre tea set on the side table.
The pink coverlet she took for herself, and after resting a time she was
surprised on going back to the rooms to see how homelike they appeared.

At three o'clock she dressed and at almost four unlocked the screen,
called Belshazzar to her side, and slowly went down the drive to the
bridge. She had used the pink powder, put on a beautiful white dress,
carefully arranged her hair, and she wore the pearl ornament. Once her
fingers strayed to the pendant and she said softly, "I think both he and
mother would like me to wear it."

At the foot of the hill she stopped at a bench and sat in the shade
waiting. Belshazzar stretched beside her, and gazed at her with
questioning, friendly dog eyes. The Girl looked from Singing Water to
the lake, and up the hill to make sure it was real. She tried to quiet
her quivering muscles and nerves. He had asked her to meet him with a
smile. How could she? He could not have understood what it meant when
he made the request. There never would be any way to make him realize;
indeed, why should he? The smile must be ready. He had loved his mother
deeply, and yet he had said he did not grieve to lay her to rest. Earth
had not been kind. Then why should she sorrow for her mother? Again life
had been not only unkind, but bitterly cruel.

Belshazzar arose and watched down the drive. The Girl looked also.
Through the gate and up the levee came a strange procession. First
walked the Harvester alone, with bared head, and he carried an arm load
of white lilies. A carriage containing a man and several women followed.
Then came a white hearse with snowy plumes, and behind that another
carriage filled with people, and Betsy followed drawing men in the
spring wagon. The Girl arose and as she stepped to the drive she swayed
uncertainly an instant.

"Gracious Heaven!" she gasped. "He is bringing her in white, and with
flowers and song!"

Then she lifted her head, and with a smile on her lips she went to meet
him. As she reached his side, he tenderly put an arm around her, and
came on steadily.

"Courage Girl!" he whispered. "Be as brave as she was!"

Around the driveway and up the hill he half carried her, to a seat he
had placed under the oak. Before her lay the white-lined grave, and the
Harvester arranged his lilies around it. The teams stopped at the barn
and men came up the hill bearing a white burden. Behind them followed
the minister who yesterday had performed their marriage ceremony, and
after him a choir of trained singers softly chanting:

     "Blessed are the dead who die in the Lord,
     For they shall cease from their labours."


"But David," panted the Girl, "It was mean and poor. That is not she!"

"Sush!" said the Harvester. "It is your mother. The location was high
and dry, and it has been only a short time. We wrapped her in white
silk, laid her on a soft cushion and pillow, and housed her securely.
She can sleep well now, Ruth. Listen!"

Covered with white lilies, slowly the casket sank into earth. At its
head stood the minister and as it began to disappear, the white doves,
frightened by the strange conveyances at the stable, came circling
above. The minister looked up. He lifted a clear tenor, and softly and
purely he sang, while at a wave of his hand the choir joined him:

     "Oh, come angel band!  Oh, come, and around me stand!
     Oh, bear me away on your snowy wings to my immortal home!"


He uttered a low benediction, and singing, the people turned and went
downhill. The Harvester gathered the Girl in his arms and carried her to
the lake. He laid her in his boat and taking the oars sent it along the
bank in the shade, and through cool, green places.

"Now cry all you choose!" he said.

The overstrained Girl covered her face and sobbed wildly. After a time
he began to talk to her gently, and before she realized it, she was
listening.

"Death has been kinder to her than life, Ruth," he said. "She is lying
as you saw her last, I think. We lifted her very tenderly, wrapped
her carefully, and brought her gently as we could. Now they shall rest
together, those little mothers of ours, to whom men were not kind; and
in the long sleep we must forget, as they have forgotten, and forgive,
as no doubt they have forgiven. Don't you want to take some lilies to
them before we go to the cabin? Right there on your left are unusually
large ones."

The Girl sat up, dried her eyes and gathered the white flowers. When the
last vehicle crossed the bridge, the Harvester tied the boat and helped
her up the hill. The old oak stretched its wide arms above two little
mounds, both moss covered and scattered with flowers. The Girl added her
store and then went to the Harvester, and sank at his feet.

"Ruth, you shall not!" cried the man. "I simply will not have that. Come
now, I will bring you back this evening."

He helped her to the veranda and laid her in the swing. He sat beside
her while she rested, and then they went into the cabin for supper. Soon
he had her telling what she had found, and he was making notes of what
was yet required to transform the cabin into a home. The Harvester left
it to her to decide whether he should roof the bridge the next day or
make a trip for furnishings. She said he had better buy what they
needed and then she could make the cabin homelike while he worked on the
bridge.



CHAPTER XV. THE HARVESTER INTERPRETS LIFE

They went through the rooms together, and the Girl suggested the
furnishings she thought necessary, while the Harvester wrote the list.
The following morning he was eager to have her company, but she was very
tired and begged to be allowed to wait in the swing, so again he drove
away and left her with Belshazzar on guard. When he had gone, she went
through the cabin arranging the furniture the best she could, then
dressed and went to the swinging couch. It was so wide and heavy a light
wind rocked it gently, and from it she faced the fern and lily carpeted
hillside, the majesty of big trees of a thousand years, and heard the
music of Singing Water as it sparkled diamond-like where the sun rays
struck its flow. Across the drive and down the valley to the brilliant
bit of marsh it hurried on its way to Loon Lake.

There were squirrels barking and racing in the big trees and over the
ground. They crossed the sodded space of lawn and came to the top step
for nuts, eating them from cunning paws. They were living life according
to the laws of their nature. She knew that their sharp, startling bark
was not to frighten her, but to warn straying intruders of other species
of their kindred from a nest, because the Harvester had told her so. He
had said their racing here and there in wild scramble was a game of tag
and she found it most interesting to observe.

Birds of brilliant colour flashed everywhere, singing in wild joy, and
tilted on the rising hedge before her, hunting berries and seeds. Their
bubbling, spontaneous song was an instinctive outpouring of their joy
over mating time, nests, young, much food, and running water. Their
social, inquiring, short cry was to locate a mate, and call her to good
feeding. The sharp wild scream of a note was when a hawk passed over, a
weasel lurked in the thicket, or a black snake sunned on the bushes. She
remembered these things, and lay listening intently, trying to interpret
every sound as the Harvester did.

Birds of wide wing hung as if nailed to the sky, or wheeled and sailed
in grandeur. They were searching the landscape below to locate a hare
or snake in the waving grass or carrion in the fields. The wonderful
exhibitions of wing power were their expression of exultation in life,
just as the song sparrow threatened to rupture his throat as he swung
on the hedge, and the red bird somewhere in the thicket whistled so
forcefully it sounded as if the notes might hurt him.

On the lake bass splashed in a game with each other. Grebes chattered,
because they were very social. Ducks dived and gobbled for roots and
worms of the lake shore, and congratulated each other when they were
lucky.

Killdeer cried for slaughter, in plaintive tones, as their white breasts
gleamed silver-like across the sky. They insisted on the death of their
ancient enemies, because the deer had trampled nests around the
shore, roiled the water, spoiled the food hunting, and had been wholly
unmindful of the laws of feathered folk from the beginning.

Behind the barn imperial cocks crowed challenges of defiance to each
other and all the world, because they once had worn royal turbans on
their heads, and ruled the forests, even the elephants and lions. Happy
hens cackled when they deposited an egg, and wandered through their park
singing the spring egg song unceasingly.

Upon the barn Ajax spread and exulted in glittering plumage, and
screamed viciously. He was sending a wireless plea to the forests of
Ceylon for a gray mate to come and share the ridge pole with him, and
help him wage red war on the sickening love making of the white doves he
hated.

Everything was beautiful, some of it was amusing, all instructive, and
intensely interesting. The Girl wanted to know about the brown, yellow,
and black butterflies sailing from flower to flower. She watched big
black and gold bees come from the forest for pollen and listened to
their monotonous bumbling. Her first humming bird poised in air, and
sipped nectar before her astonished eyes. It was marvellous, but more
wonderful to the Girl than anything she saw or heard was the fact that
because of the Harvester's teachings she now could trace through all of
it the ordained processes of the evolution of life. Everything was right
in its way, all necessary to human welfare, and so there was nothing to
fear, but marvels to learn and pictures to appreciate. She would have
taken Belshazzar and gone out, but the Harvester had exacted a promise
that she would not. The fact was, he could see that she was coming
gradually to a sane and natural view of life and living things, and he
did not want some sound or creature to frighten her, and spoil what he
had accomplished. So she swayed in the swing and watched, and tried to
interpret sights and sounds as he did.

Before an hour she realized that she was coming speedily into sympathy
with the wild life around her; for, instead of shivering and shrinking
at unaccustomed sounds, she was listening especially for them, and
trying to arrive at a sane version. Instead of the senseless roar
of commerce, manufacture, and life of a city, she was beginning to
appreciate sounds that varied and carried the Song of Life in unceasing
measure and absorbing meaning, while she was more than thankful for the
fresh, pure air, and the blessed, God-given light. It seemed to the Girl
that there was enough sunshine at Medicine Woods to furnish rays of gold
for the whole world.

"Bel," she said to the dog standing beside her, "it's a shame to
separate you from the Medicine Man and pen you here with me. It's a
wonder you don't bite off my head and run away to find him. He's gone to
bring more things to make life beautiful. I wanted to go with him, but
oh Bel, there's something dreadfully wrong with me. I was afraid I'd
fall on the streets and frighten and shame him. I'm so weak, I scarcely
can walk straight across one of these big, cool rooms that he has built
for me. He can make everything beautiful, Bel, a home, rooms, clothing,
grounds, and life----above everything else he can make life beautiful.
He's so splendid and wonderful, with his wide understanding and sane
interpretation and God-like sympathy and patience. Why Belshazzar, he
can do the greatest thing in all the world! He can make you forget that
the grave annihilates your dear ones by hideous processes, and set you
to thinking instead that they come back to you in whispering leaves and
flower perfumes. If I didn't owe him so much that I ought to pay, if
this wasn't so alluringly beautiful, I'd like to go to the oak and lie
beside those dear women resting there, and give my tired body to
furnish sap for strength and leaves for music. He can take its bitterest
sting----from death, Bel----and that's the most wonderful thing----in
life, Bel----"

Her voice became silent, her eyes closed; the dog stretched himself
beside her on guard, and it was so the Harvester found them when he
drove home from the city. He heaped his load in the dining-room, stabled
Betsy, carried the things he had brought where he thought they belonged,
and prepared food. When she awakened she came to him.

"How is it going, Girl?" asked the Harvester.

"I can't tell you how lovely it has been!"

"Do you really mean that your heart is warming a little to things here?"

"Indeed I do! I can't tell you what a morning I've had. There have been
such myriad things to see and hear. Oh, Harvester, can you ever teach me
what all of it means?"

"I can right now," said the Harvester promptly. "It means two things,
so simple any little child can understand----the love of God and the
evolution of life. I am not precisely clear as to what I mean when I say
God. I don't know whether it is spirit, matter, or force; it is that big
thing that brings forth worlds, establishes their orbits, and gives us
heat, light, food, and water. To me, that is God and His love. Just that
we are given birth, sheltered, provisioned, and endowed for our work.
Evolution is the natural consequence of this. It is the plan steadily
unfolding. If I were you, I wouldn't bother my head over these
questions, they never have been scientifically explained to the
beginning; I doubt if they ever will be, because they start with the
origin of matter and that is too far beyond man for him to penetrate.
Just enjoy to the depths of your soul----that's worship. Be thankful for
everything----that's praising God as the birds praise him. And 'do unto
others' that's all there is of love and religion combined in one fell
swoop."

"You should go before the world and tell every one that!"

"No! It isn't my vocation," said the Harvester. "My work is to provide
pain-killer. I don't believe, Ruth, that there is any one on the
footstool who is doing a better job along that line. I am boastfully
proud of it----just of sending in the packages that kill fever, refresh
poor blood, and strengthen weak hearts; unadulterated, honest weight,
fresh, and scrupulously clean. My neighbours have a different name for
it; I call it a man's work."

"Every one who understands must," said the Girl. "I wish I could help at
that. I feel as if it would do more to wipe out the pain I've suffered
and seen her endure than anything else. Man, when I grow strong enough I
want to help you. I believe that I am going to love it here."

"Don't ever suppress your feelings, Ruth!" hastily cried the Harvester.
"It will be very bad for you. You will become wrought up, and 'het up,'
as Granny Moreland says, and it will make you very ill. When we drive
the fever from your blood, the ache from your bones, the poison of
wrong conditions from your soul, and good, healthy, red corpuscles begin
pumping through your little heart like a windmill, you can stake your
life you're going to love it here. And the location and work are not
all you're going to care for either, honey. Now just wait! That was not
'nominated in the bond.' I'm allowed to talk. I never agreed not to SAY
things. What I promised was not to DO them. So as I said, honey, sit at
this table, and eat the food I've cooked; and by that time the furniture
van will be here, and the men will unload, and you shall reign on a
throne and tell me where and how."

"Oh if I were only stronger, David!"

"You are!" said the Harvester. "You are much better than you were
yesterday. You can talk, and that's all that's necessary. The rooms
are ready for furniture. The men will carry it where you want it. A
decorator is coming to hang the curtains. By night we will be settled;
you can lie in the swing while I read to you a story so wonderful that
the wildest fairy tale you ever heard never touched it."

"What will it be, David?"

"Eat all the red raspberries and cream, bread and butter, and drink all
the milk you can. There's blood, beefsteak, and bones in it. As I was
saying, you have come here a stranger to a strange land. The first thing
is for you to understand and love the woods. Before you can do that you
should master the history of one tree; just the same as you must learn
to know and love me before your childlike trust in all mankind returns
again. Understand? Well, the fates knew you were on the way, coming
trembling down the brink, Ruth, so they put it into the heart of a great
man to write largely of a wonderful tree, especially for your benefit.
After it had fallen he took it apart, split it in sections, and year
by year spread out history for all the world to read. It made a classic
story filled with unsurpassed wonders. It was a pine of a thousand
years, close the age of our mother tree, Ruth, and when we have learned
from Enos Mills how to wrest secrets from the hearts of centuries, we
will climb the hill and measure our oak, and then I will estimate, and
you will write, and we will make a record for our tree."

"Oh, I'd like that!"

"So would I," said the Harvester. "And a million other things I can
think of that we can learn together. It won't require long for me to
teach you all I know, and by that time your hand will be clasped in
mine, and our 'hearts will beat as one,' and you will give me a kiss
every night and morning, and a few during the day for interest, and we
will go on in life together and learn songs, miracles, and wonders until
the old oak calls us. Then we will ascend the hill gladly and lie down
and offer up our bodies, and our children will lay flowers over our
hearts, and gather the herbs and paint the pictures? Amen. I hear a van
on the bridge. Just you go to your room and lie down until I get things
unloaded and where they belong. Then you and the decorator can make us
home-like, and to-morrow we will begin to live. Won't that be great,
Ruth?"

"With you, yes, I think it will."

"That will do for this time," said the Harvester, as he opened the door
to her room. "Lie and rest until I say ready."

As he went to meet the men, she could hear him singing lustily, "Praise
God from whom all blessings flow."

"What a child he is!" she said. "And what a man!"

For an hour heavy feet sounded through the cabin carrying furniture to
different rooms. Then with a floor brush in one hand, and a polishing
cloth in the other, the Harvester tapped at her door and helped the Girl
upstairs. He had divided the space into three large, square sleeping
chambers. In each he had set up a white iron bed, a dressing table, and
wash stand, and placed two straight-backed and one rocking chair, all
white. The walls were tinted lightly with green added to the plaster.
There was a mattress and a stack of bedding on each bed, and a large rug
and several small ones on the floors. He led her to the rocking chair in
the middle room, where she could see through the open doors of the other
two.

"Now," said the Harvester, "I didn't know whether the room with two
windows toward the lake and one on the marsh, or two facing the woods
and one front, was the guest chamber. It seemed about an even throw
whether a visitor would prefer woods or water, so I made them both guest
chambers, and got things alike for them. Now if we are entertaining two,
one can't feel more highly honoured than the other. Was that a scheme?"

"Fine!" said the Girl. "I don't see how it could be surpassed."

"'Be sure you are right, then go ahead,'" quoted the Harvester. "Now
I'll make the beds and Mr. Rogers can hang the curtains. Is white
correct for sleeping rooms? Won't that wash best and always be fresh?"

"It will," said the Girl. "White wash curtains are much the nicest."

"Make them short Mr. Rogers; keep them off the floor," advised the
Harvester. "And simple----don't arrange any thing elaborate that will
tire a woman to keep in order. Whack them off the right length and pin
them to the poles."

"How about that, Mrs. Langston?" asked the decorator.

"I am quite sure that is the very best thing to do," said the Girl; and
the curtains were hung while the mattress was placed.

"Now about this?" inquired the Harvester. "Do I put on sheets and fix
these beds ready to use?"

"I would not," said the Girl. "I would spread the pad and the
counterpane and lay the sheets and pillows in the closet until they are
wanted. They can be sunned and the bed made delightfully fresh."

"Of course," said the Harvester.

When he had finished, he spread a cover on the dressing table and
laid out white toilet articles and grouped a white wash set with green
decorations on the stand. Then he brushed the floor, spread a big green
rug in the middle and small ones before the bed, stand, and table, and
coming out closed the door.

"Guest chamber with lake view is now ready for company," announced the
Harvester. "Repeat the operation on the woods room, finished also. Why
do some people make work of things and string them out eternally and
fuss so much? Isn't this simple and easy, Ruth?"

"Yes, if you can afford it," said the Girl.

"Forbear!" cried the Harvester. "We have the goods, the dealer has my
check. Excuse me ten minutes, until I furnish another room."

The laughing Girl could catch glimpses of him busy over beds and
dresser, floor and rugs; then he came where she sat.

"Woods guest chamber ready," he said. "Now we come to the interior
apartment, that from its view might be called the marsh room. Aside
from being two windows short, it is exactly similar to the others. It
occurred to me that, in order to make up for the loss of those windows,
and also because I may be compelled to ask some obliging woman to occupy
it in case your health is precarious at any time, and in view of the
further fact that if any such woman could be found, and would kindly and
willingly care for us, my gratitude would be inexpressible; on account
of all these things, I got a shade the BEST furnishings for this room."

The Girl stared at him with blank face.

"You see," said the Harvester, "this is a question of ethics. Now what
is a guest? A thing of a day! A person who disturbs your routine and
interferes with important concerns. Why should any one be grateful for
company? Why should time and money be lavished on visitors? They come.
You overwork yourself. They go. You are glad of it. You return the
visit, because it's the only way to have back at them; but why pamper
them unnecessarily? Now a good housekeeper, that means more than words
can express. Comfort, kindness, sanitary living, care in illness! Here's
to the prospective housekeeper of Medicine Woods! Rogers, hang those
ruffled embroidered curtains. Observe that whereas mere guest beds
are plain white, this has a touch of brass. Where guest rugs are floor
coverings, this is a work of art. Where guest brushes are celluloid,
these are enamelled, and the dresser cover is hand embroidered. Let me
also call your attention to the chairs touched with gold, cushioned
for ease, and a decorated pitcher and bowl. Watch the bounce of these
springs and the thickness of this mattress and pad, and notice that
where guests, however welcome, get a down cover of sateen, the lady of
the house has silkaline. Won't she prepare us a breakfast after a night
in this room?"

"David, are you in earnest?" gasped the Girl.

"Don't these things prove it?" asked the Harvester. "No woman can enter
my home, when my necessities are so great I have to hire her to come,
and take the WORST in the house. After my wife, she gets the best, every
time. Whenever I need help, the woman who will come and serve me is what
I'd call the real guest of the house. Friend? Where are your friends
when trouble comes? It always brings a crowd on account of the
excitement, and there is noise and racing; but if your soul is saved
alive, it is by a steady, trained hand you pay to help you. Friends
come and go, but a good housekeeper remains and is a business
proposition--one that if conducted rightly for both parties and on a
strictly common-sense basis, gives you living comfort. Now that we have
disposed of the guests that go and the one that remains, we will proceed
downward and arrange for ourselves."

"David, did you ever know any one who treated a housekeeper as you say
you would?"

"No. And I never knew any one who raised medicinal stuff for a living,
but I'm making a gilt-edged success of it, and I would of a housekeeper,
too."

"It doesn't seem----"

"That's the bedrock of all the trouble on the earth," interrupted the
Harvester. "We are a nation and a part of a world that spends our time
on 'seeming.' Our whole outer crust is 'seeming.' When we get beneath
the surface and strike the BEING, then we live as we are privileged by
the Almighty. I don't think I give a tinker how anything SEEMS. What
concerns me is how it IS. It doesn't 'seem' possible to you to hire a
woman to come into your home and take charge of its cleanliness and the
food you eat--the very foundation of life--and treat her as an honoured
guest, and give her the best comfort you have to offer. The cold room,
the old covers, the bare floor, and the cast off furniture are for her.
No wonder, as a rule, she gives what she gets. She dignifies her labour
in the same ratio that you do. Wait until we need a housekeeper, and
then gaze with awe on the one I will raise to your hand."

"I wonder----"

"Don't! It's wearing! Come tell me how to make our living-room less bare
than it appears at present."

They went downstairs together, followed by the decorator, and began work
on the room. The Girl was placed on a couch and made comfortable and
then the Harvester looked around.

"That bundle there, Rogers, is the curtains we bought for this room. If
you and my wife think they are not right, we will not hang them."

The decorator opened the package and took out curtains of tan-
goods with a border of blue and brown.

"Those are not expensive," said the Harvester, "but to me a window
appears bare with only a shade, so I thought we'd try these, and when
they become soiled we'll burn them and buy some fresh ones."

"Good idea!" laughed the Girl. "As a house decorator you surpass
yourself as a Medicine Man."

"Fix these as you did those upstairs," ordered the Harvester. "We don't
want any fol-de-rols. Put the bottom even with the sill and shear them
off at the top."

"No, I am going to arrange these," said the decorator, "you go on with
your part."

"All right!" agreed the Harvester. "First, I'll lay the big rug."

He cleared the floor, spread a large rug with a rich brown centre and a
wide blue border. Smaller ones of similar design and colour were placed
before each of the doors leading from the room.

"Now for the hearth," said the Harvester, "I got this tan goat skin.
Doesn't that look fairly well?"

It certainly did; and the Girl and the decorator hastened to say so. The
Harvester replaced the table and chairs, and then sat on the couch at
the Girl's feet.

"I call this almost finished," he remarked. "All we need now is a
bouquet and something on the walls, and that is serious business.
What goes on them usually remains for a long time, and so it should be
selected with care. Ruth, have you a picture of your mother?"

"None since she was my mother. I have some lovely girl photographs."

"Good!" cried the Harvester. "Exactly the thing! I have a picture of my
mother when she was a pretty girl. We will select the best of yours and
have them enlarged in those beautiful brown prints they make in these
days, and we'll frame one for each side of the mantel. After that you
can decorate the other walls as you see things you want. Fifteen minutes
gone; we are ready to take up the line of march to the dining-room. Oh
I forgot my pillows! Here are a half dozen tan, brown, and blue for this
room. Ruth, you arrange them."

The Girl heaped four on the couch, stood one beside the hearth, and laid
another in a big chair.

"Now I don't know what you will think of this," said the Harvester. "I
found it in a magazine at the library. I copied this whole room. The
plan was to have the floor, furniture, and casings of golden oak and the
walls pale green. Then it said get yellow curtains bordered with green
and a green rug with yellow figures, so I got them. I had green leather
cushions made for the window seats, and these pillows go on them. Hang
the saffron curtains, Rogers, and we will finish in good shape for
dinner by six. By the way, Ruth, when will you select your dishes? It
will take a big set to fill all these shelves and you shall have exactly
what you want."

"I can use those you have very well."

"Oh no you can't!" cried the Harvester. "I may live and work in the
woods, but I am not so benighted that I don't own and read the best
books and magazines, and subscribe for a few papers. I patronize the
library and see what is in the stores. My money will buy just as much as
any man's, if I do wear khaki trousers. Kindly notice the word. Save in
deference to your ladyship I probably would have said pants. You see how
ELITE I can be if I try. And it not only extends to my wardrobe, to a
'yaller' and green dining-room, but it takes in the 'chany' as well. I
have looked up that, too. You want china, cut glass, silver cutlery, and
linen. Ye! Ye! You needn't think I don't know anything but how to dig in
the dirt. I have been studying this especially, and I know exactly what
to get."

"Come here," said the Girl, making a place for him beside her. "Now let
me tell you what I think. We are going to live in the woods, and our
home is a log cabin----"

"With acetylene lights, a furnace, baths, and hot and cold water----"
interpolated the Harvester.

The Girl and the decorator laughed.

"Anyway," said she, "if you are going to let me have what I would like,
I'd prefer a set of tulip yellow dishes with the Dutch little figures
on them. I don't know what they cost, but certainly they are not so
expensive as cut glass and china."

"Is that earnest or is it because you think I am spending too much
money?"

"It is what I want. Everything else is different; why should we have
dishes like city folk? I'd dearly love to have the Dutch ones, and
a white cloth with a yellow border, glass where it is necessary, and
silver knives, forks, and spoons."

"That would be great, all right!" endorsed the decorator. "And you have
got a priceless old lustre tea set there, and your willow ware is as
fine as I ever saw. If I were you, I wouldn't buy a dish with what you
have, except the yellow set."

"Great day!" ejaculated the Harvester. "Will you tell me why my great
grandmother's old pink and green teapot is priceless?"

The Girl explained pink lustre. "That set in the shop I knew in Chicago
would sell for from three to five hundred dollars. Truly it would! I've
seen one little pink and green pitcher like yours bring nine dollars
there. And you've not only got the full tea set, but water and dip
pitchers, two bowls, and two bread plates. They are priceless, because
the secret of making them is lost; they take on beauty with age, and
they were your great-grandmother's."

The Harvester reached over and energetically shook hands.

"Ruth, I'm so glad you've got them!" he bubbled. "Now elucidate on my
willow ware. What is it? Where is it? Why have I willow ware and am not
informed. Who is responsible for this? Did my ancestors buy better than
they knew, or worse? Is willow ware a crime for which I must hide
my head, or is it further riches thrust upon me? I thought I had
investigated the subject of proper dishes quite thoroughly; but I am
very certain I saw no mention of lustre or willow. I thought, in my
ignorance, that lustre was a dress, and willow a tree. Have I been
deceived? Why is a blue plate or pitcher willow ware?"

"Bring that platter from the mantel," ordered the Girl, "and I will show
you."

The Harvester obeyed and followed the finger that traced the design.

"That's a healthy willow tree!" he commented. "If Loon Lake couldn't go
ahead of that it should be drained. And will you please tell me why this
precious platter from which I have eaten much stewed chicken, fried ham,
and in youthful days sopped the gravy----will you tell me why this relic
of my ancestors is called a willow plate, when there are a majority of
orange trees so extremely fruitful they have neglected to grow a leaf?
Why is it not an orange plate? Look at that boat! And in plain sight of
it, two pagodas, a summer house, a water-sweep, and a pair of corpulent
swallows; you would have me believe that a couple are eloping in broad
daylight."

"Perhaps it's night! And those birds are doves."

"Never!" cried the Harvester. "There is a total absence of shadows.
There is no moon. Each orange tree is conveniently split in halves, so
you can see to count the fruit accurately; the birds are in flight. Only
a swallow or a stork can fly in decorations, either by day or by night.
And for any sake look at that elopement! He goes ahead carrying a cane,
she comes behind lugging the baggage, another man with a cane brings up
the rear. They are not running away. They have been married ten years
at least. In a proper elopement, they forget there are such things
as jewels and they always carry each other. I've often looked up the
statistics and it's the only authorized version. As I regard this
treasure, I grow faint when I remember with what unnecessary force my
father bore down when he carved the ham. I'll bet a cooky he split those
orange trees. Now me----I'll never dare touch knife to it again. I'll
always carve the meat on the broiler, and gently lift it to this
platter with a fork. Or am I not to be allowed to dine from my ancestral
treasure again?"

"Not in a green and yellow room," laughed the Girl. "I'll tell you what
I think. If I had a tea table to match the living-room furniture, and
it sat beside the hearth, and on it a chafing dish to cook in, and the
willow ware to eat from, we could have little tea parties in there, when
we aren't very hungry or to treat a visitor. It would help make that
room 'homey,' and it's wonderful how they harmonize with the other
things."

"How much willow ware have I got to 'bestow' on you?" inquired the
Harvester. "Suppose you show me all of it. A guilty feeling arises in my
breast, and I fear me I have committed high crimes!"

"Oh Man! You didn't break or lose any of those dishes, did you?"

"Show me!" insisted the Harvester.

The Girl arose and going to the cupboard he had designed for her china
she opened it, and set before him a teapot, cream pitcher, two plates, a
bowl, a pitcher, the meat platter, and a sugar bowl. "If there were all
of the cups, saucers, and plates, I know where they would bring five
hundred dollars," she said.

"Ruth, are you getting even with me for poking fun at them, or are you
in earnest?" asked the Harvester.

"I mean every word of it."

"You really want a small, black walnut table made especially for those
old dishes?"

"Not if you are too busy. I could use it with beautiful effect and much
pleasure, and I can't tell you how proud I'd be of them."

The Harvester's face flushed. "Excuse me," he said rising. "I have now
finished furnishing a house; I will go and take a peep at the engine."
He went into the kitchen and hearing the rattle of dishes the Girl
followed. She stepped in just in time to see him hastily slide something
into his pocket. He picked up a half dozen old white plates and saucers
and several cups and started toward the evaporator. He heard her coming.

"Look here, honey," he said turning, "you don't want to see the
dry-house just now. I have terrific heat to do some rapid work. I won't
be gone but a few minutes. You better boss the decorator.

"I'm afraid that wasn't very diplomatic," he muttered. "It savoured a
little of being sent back. But if what she says is right, and she
should know if they handle such stuff at that art store, she will feel
considerably better not to see this."

He set his load at the door, drew an old blue saucer from his pocket and
made a careful examination. He pulled some leaves from a bush and pushed
a greasy cloth out of the saucer, wiped it the best he could, and held
it to light.

"That is a crime!" he commented. "Saucer from your maternal ancestors'
tea set used for a grease dish. I am afraid I'd better sink it in the
lake. She'd feel worse to see it than never to know. Wish I could clean
off the grease! I could do better if it was hot. I can set it on the
engine."

The Harvester placed the saucer on the engine, entered the dry-house,
and closed the door. In the stifling air he began pouring seed from
beautiful, big willow plates to the old white ones.

"About the time I have ruined you," he said to a white plate, "some one
will pop up and discover that the art of making you is lost and you are
priceless, and I'll have been guilty of another blunder. Now there are
the dishes mother got with baking powder. She thought they were grand.
I know plenty well she prized them more than these blue ones or she
wouldn't have saved them and used these for every day. There they set,
all so carefully taken care of, and the Girl doesn't even look at them.
Thank Heaven, there are the four remaining plates all right, anyway! Now
I've got seed in some of the saucers; one is there; where on earth is
the last one? And where, oh unkind fates! are the cups?"

He found more saucers and set them with the plates. As he passed the
engine he noticed the saucer on it was bubbling grease, literally
exuding it from the particles of clay.

"Hooray!" cried the Harvester. He took it up, but it was so hot he
dropped it. With a deft sweep he caught it in air, and shoved it on
a tray. Then he danced and blew on his burned hand. Snatching out his
handkerchief he rubbed off all the grease, and imagined the saucer was
brighter.

"If 'a little is good, more is better,'" quoted the Harvester.

Wadding the handkerchief he returned the saucer to the engine. Then he
slipped out, dripping perspiration, glanced toward the cabin, and ran
into the work room. The first object he saw was a willow cup half full
of red paint, stuck and dried as if to remain forever. He took his knife
and tried to whittle it off, but noticing that he was scratching the cup
he filled it with turpentine, set it under a work bench, turned a tin
pan over it, and covered it with shavings. A few steps farther brought
one in sight, filled with carpet tacks. He searched everywhere, but
could find no more, so he went to the laboratory. Beside his wash bowl
at the door stood the last willow saucer. He had used it for years as a
soap dish. He scraped the contents on the bench and filled the dish with
water. Four cups held medicinal seeds and were in good condition. He
lacked one, although he could not remember of ever having broken it.
Gathering his collection, he returned to the dry-house to see how the
saucer was coming on. Again it was bubbling, and he polished off the
grease and set back the dish. It certainly was growing better. He
carried his treasures into the work room, and went to the barn to
feed. As he was leaving the stable he uttered a joyous exclamation
and snatched from a window sill a willow cup, gummed and smeared with
harness oil.

"The full set, by hokey!" marvelled the Harvester. "Say, Betsy, the only
name for this is luck! Now if I only can clean them, I'll be ready to
make her tea table, whatever that is. My I hope she will stay away until
I get these in better shape!"

He filled the last cup with turpentine, set it with the other under the
work bench, stacked the remaining pieces, polished the saucer he was
baking, and went to bring a dish pan and towel. He drew some water from
the pipes of the evaporator, put in the soap, and carried it to the work
room. There he carefully washed and wiped all the pieces, save two cups
and one saucer. He did not know how long it would require to bake the
grease from that, but he was sure it was improving. He thought he could
clean the paint cup, but he imagined the harness oil one would require
baking also.

As he stood busily working over the dishes, with light step the Girl
came to the door. She took one long look and understood. She turned
and swiftly went back to the cabin, but her shoulders were shaking.
Presently the Harvester came in and explained that after finishing in
the dry-house he had gone to do the feeding. Then he suggested that
before it grew dark they should go through the rooms and see how they
appeared, and gather the flowers the Girl wanted. So together they
decided everything was clean, comfortable, and harmonized.

Then they went to the hillside sloping to the lake. For the dining-room,
the Girl wanted yellow water lilies, so the Harvester brought his old
boat and gathered enough to fill the green bowl. For the living-room,
she used wild ragged robins in the blue bowl, and on one end of the
mantel set a pitcher of saffron and on the other arrowhead lilies. For
her room, she selected big, blushy mallows that grew all along Singing
Water and around the lake.

"Isn't that slightly peculiar?" questioned the Harvester.

"Take a peep," said the Girl, opening her door.

She had spread the pink coverlet on her couch, and when she set the big
pink bowl filled with mallows on the table the effect was exquisite.

"I think perhaps that's a little Frenchy," she said, "and you may have
to be educated to it; but salmon pink and buttercup yellow are colours I
love in combination."

She closed the door and went to find something to eat, and then to
the swing, where she liked to rest, look, and listen. The Harvester
suggested reading to her, but she shook her head.

"Wait until winter," she said, "when the days are longer and cold, and
the snow buries everything, and then read. Now tell me about my hedge
and the things you have planted in it."

The Harvester went out and collected a bunch of twigs. He handed her a
big, evenly proportioned leaf of ovate shape, and explained: "This is
burning bush, so called because it has pink berries that hang from long,
graceful stems all winter, and when fully open they expose a flame-red
seed pod. It was for this colour on gray and white days that I planted
it. In the woods I grow it in thickets. The root bark brings twenty
cents a pound, at the very least. It is good fever medicine."

"Is it poison?"

"No. I didn't set anything acutely poisonous in your hedge. I wanted it
to be a mass of bloom you were free to cut for the cabin all spring, an
attraction to birds in summer, and bright with colour in winter. To draw
the feathered tribe, I planted alder, wild cherry, and grape-vines.
This is cherry. The bark is almost as beautiful as birch. I raise it
for tonics and the birds love the cherries. This fern-like leaf is from
mountain ash, and when it attains a few years' growth it will flame with
colour all winter in big clusters of scarlet berries. That I grow in
the woods is a picture in snow time, and the bark is one of my standard
articles."

The Girl raised on her elbow and looked at the hedge.

"I see it," she said. "The berries are green now. I suppose they change
colour as they ripen."

"Yes," said the Harvester. "And you must not confuse them with sumac.
The leaves are somewhat similar, but the heads differ in colour and
shape. The sumac and buckeye you must not touch, until we learn what
they will do to you. To some they are slightly poisonous, to others not.
I couldn't help putting in a few buckeyes on account of the big buds
in early spring. You will like the colour if you are fond of pink and
yellow in combination, and the red-brown nuts in grayish-yellow, prickly
hulls, and the leaf clusters are beautiful, but you must use care. I put
in witch hazel for variety, and I like its appearance; it's mighty
good medicine, too; so is spice brush, and it has leaves that colour
brightly, and red berries. These selections were all made for a purpose.
Now here is wafer ash; it is for music as well as medicine. I have
invoked all good fairies to come and dwell in this hedge, and so I had
to provide an orchestra for their dances. This tree grows a hundred tiny
castanets in a bunch, and when they ripen and become dry the wind shakes
fine music from them. Yes, they are medicine; that is, the bark of
the roots is. Almost without exception everything here has medicinal
properties. The tulip poplar will bear you the loveliest flowers of all,
and its root bark, taken in winter, makes a good fever remedy."

"How would it do to eat some of the leaves and see if they wouldn't take
the feverishness from me?"

"It wouldn't do at all," said the Harvester. "We are well enough fixed
to allow Doc to come now, and he is the one to allay the fever."

"Oh no!" she cried. "No! I don't want to see a doctor. I will be all
right very soon. You said I was better."

"You are," said the Harvester. "Much better! We will have you strong and
well soon. You should have come in time for a dose of sassafras. Your
hedge is filled with that, because of its peculiar leaves and odour. I
put in dogwood for the white display around the little green bloom,
lots of alder for bloom and berries, haws for blossoms and fruit for the
squirrels, wild crab apples for the exquisite bloom and perfume, button
bush for the buttons, a few pokeberry plants for the colour, and I tried
some mallows, but I doubt if it's wet enough for them. I set pecks of
vine roots, that are coming nicely, and ferns along the front edge. Give
it two years and that hedge will make a picture that will do your eyes
good."

"Can you think of anything at all you forgot?"

"Yes indeed!" said the Harvester. "The woods are full of trees I have
not used; some because I overlooked them, some I didn't want. A hedge
like this, in perfection, is the work of years. Some species must be cut
back, some encouraged, but soon it will be lovely, and its colour and
fruit attract every bird of the heavens and butterflies and insects of
all varieties. I set several common cherry trees for the robins and some
blackberry and raspberry vines for the orioles. The bloom is pretty and
the birds you'll have will be a treat to see and hear, if we keep away
cats, don't fire guns, scatter food, and move quietly among them. With
our water attractions added, there is nothing impossible in the way of
making friends with feathered folk."

"There is one thing I don't understand," said the Girl. "You wouldn't
risk breaking the wing of a moth by keeping it when you wanted a drawing
very much; you don't seem to kill birds and animals that other people
do. You almost worship a tree; now how can you take a knife and peel the
bark to sell or dig up beautiful bushes by the root."

"Perhaps I've talked too much about the woods," said the Harvester
gently. "I've longed inexpressibly for sympathetic company here, because
I feel rooted for life, so I am more than anxious that you should care
for it. I may have made you feel that my greatest interest is in the
woods, and that I am not consistent when I call on my trees and plants
to yield of their store for my purposes. Above everything else, the
human proposition comes first, Ruth. I do love my trees, bushes, and
flowers, because they keep me at the fountain of life, and teach me
lessons no book ever hints at; but above everything come my fellow men.
All I do is for them. My heart is filled with feeling for the things
you see around you here, but it would be joy to me to uproot the most
beautiful plant I have if by so doing I could save you pain. Other men
have wives they love as well, little children they have fathered, big
bodies useful to the world, that are sometimes crippled with disease.
There is nothing I would not give to allay the pain of humanity. It is
not inconsistent to offer any growing thing you soon can replace, to
cure suffering. Get that idea out of your head! You said you could
worship at the shrine of the pokeberry bed, you feel holier before the
arrowhead lilies, your face takes on an appearance of reverence when you
see pink mallow blooms. Which of them would you have hesitated a second
in uprooting if you could have offered it to subdue fever or pain in the
body of the little mother you loved?"

"Oh I see!" cried the Girl. "Like everything else you make this
different. You worship all this beauty and grace, wrought by your
hands, but you carry your treasure to the market place for the good of
suffering humanity. Oh Man! I love the work you do!"

"Good!" cried the Harvester. "Good! And Ruth-girl, while you are about
it, see if you can't combine the man and his occupation a little."



CHAPTER XVI. GRANNY MORELAND'S VISIT

The following morning the Girl was awakened by wheels on the gravel
outside her window, and lifted her head to see Betsy passing with a load
of lumber. Shortly afterward the sound of hammer and saw came to her,
and she knew that Singing Water bridge was being roofed to provide shade
for her. She dressed and went to the kitchen to find a dainty breakfast
waiting, so she ate what she could, and then washed the dishes and
swept. By that time she was so tired she dropped on a dining-room window
seat, and lay looking toward the bridge. She could catch glimpses of
the Harvester as he worked. She watched his deft ease in handling heavy
timbers, and the assurance with which he builded. Sometimes he stood and
with tilted head studied his work a minute, then swiftly proceeded. He
placed three tree trunks on each side for pillars, laid joists across,
formed his angle, and nailed boards as a foundation for shingling.
Occasionally he glanced toward the cabin, and finally came swinging up
the drive. He entered the kitchen softly, but when he saw the Girl in
the window he sat at her feet.

"Oh but this is a morning, Ruth!" he said.

She looked at him closely. He radiated health and good cheer. His tanned
cheeks were flushed red with exercise, and the hair on his temples was
damp.

"You have been breaking the rules," he said. "It is the law that I am
to do the work until you are well and strong again. Why did you tire
yourself?"

"I am so perfectly useless! I see so many things that I would enjoy
doing. Oh you can do everything else, make me well! Make me strong!"

"How can I, when you won't do as I tell you?"

"I will! Indeed I will!"

"Then no more attempts to stand over dishes and clean big floors. You
mustn't overwork yourself at anything. The instant you feel in the least
tired you must lie down and rest."

"But Man! I'm tired every minute, with a dead, dull ache, and I don't
feel as if I ever would be rested again in all the world."

The Harvester took one of her hands, felt its fevered palm, fluttering
wrist pulse, and noticed that the brilliant red of her lips had extended
to spots on her cheeks. He formed his resolution.

"Can't work on that bridge any more until I drive in for some big
nails," he said. "Do you mind being left alone for an hour?"

"Not at all, if Bel will stay with me. I'll lie in the swing."

"All right!" answered the Harvester. "I'll help you out and to get
settled. Is there anything you want from town?"

"No, not a thing!"

"Oh but you are modest!" cried the Harvester. "I can sit here and name
fifty things I want for you."

"Oh but you are extravagant!" imitated the Girl. "Please, please, Man,
don't! Can't you see I have so much now I don't know what to do with it?
Sometimes I almost forget the ache, just lying and looking at all the
wonderful riches that have come to me so suddenly. I can't believe they
won't vanish as they came. By the hour in the night I look at my lovely
room, and I just fight my eyes to keep them from closing for fear
they'll open in that stifling garret to the heat of day and work I have
not strength to do. I know yet all this will prove to be a dream and a
wilder one than yours."

The face of the Harvester was very anxious.

"Please to remember my dream came true," he said, "and much sooner than
I had the least hope that it would. I'm wide awake or I couldn't be
building bridges; and you are real, if I know flesh and blood when I
touch it."

"If I were well, strong, and attractive, I could understand," she said.
"Then I could work in the house, at the drawings, help with the herbs,
and I'd feel as if I had some right to be here."

"All that is coming," said the Harvester. "Take a little more time. You
can't expect to sin steadily against the laws of health for years,
and recover in a day. You will be all right much sooner than you think
possible."

"Oh I hope so!" said the Girl. "But sometimes I doubt it. How I could
come here and put such a burden on a stranger, I can't see. I scarcely
can remember what awful stress drove me. I had no courage. I should have
finished in my garret as my mother did. I must have some of my father's
coward blood in me. She never would have come. I never should!"

"If it didn't make any real difference to you, and meant all the world
to me, I don't see why you shouldn't humour me. I can't begin to tell
you how happy I am to have you here. I could shout and sing all day."

"It requires very little to make some people happy."

"You are not much, but you are going to be more soon," laughed the
Harvester, as he gently picked up the Girl and carried her to the swing,
where he covered her, kissed her hot hand, and whistled for Belshazzar.
He pulled the table close and set a pitcher of iced fruit juice on it.
Then he left her and she could hear the rattle of wheels as he crossed
the bridge and drove away.

"Betsy, this is mighty serious business," said the Harvester. "The
Girl is scorching or I don't know fever. I wonder----well, one thing
is sure----she is bound to be better off in pure, cool air and with
everything I can do to be kind, than in Henry Jameson's attic with
everything he could do to be mean. Pleasant men those Jamesons! Wonder
if the Girl's father was much like her Uncle Henry? I think not or her
refined and lovely mother never would have married him. Come to think of
it, that's no law, Betsy. I've seen beautiful and delicate women fall
under some mysterious spell, and yoke their lives with rank degenerates.
Whatever he was, they have paid the price. Maybe the wife deserved it,
and bore it in silence because she knew she did, but it's bitter hard on
Ruth. Girls should be taught to think at least one generation ahead when
they marry. I wonder what Doc will say, Betsy? He will have to come and
see for himself. I don't know how she will feel about that. I had hoped
I could pull her through with care, food, and tonics, but I don't dare
go any farther alone. Betsy, that's a thin, hot, little hand to hold a
man's only chance for happiness."

"Well, bridegroom! I've been counting the days!" said Doctor Carey. "The
Missus and I made it up this morning that we had waited as long as we
would. We are coming to-night. David."

"It's all right, Doc," said the Harvester. "Don't you dare think
anything is wrong or that I am not the proudest, happiest man in this
world, because I appear anxious. I am not trying to conceal it from you.
You know we both agreed at first that Ruth should be in the hospital,
Doc. Well, she should! She is what would be a lovely woman if she were
not full of the poison of wrong food and air, overwork, and social
conditions that have warped her. She is all I dreamed of and more, but
I've come for you. She is too sick for me. I hoped she would begin to
gain strength at once on changed conditions. As yet I can't see any
difference. She needs a doctor, but I hate for her to know it. Could you
come out this afternoon, and pretend as if it were a visit? Bring Mrs.
Carey and watch the Girl. If you need an examination, I think she will
obey me. If you can avoid it, fix what she should have and send it back
to me by a messenger. I don't like to leave her when she is so ill."

"I'll come at once, David."

"Then she will know that I came for you, and that will frighten her. You
can do more good to wait until afternoon, and pretend you are making
a social call. I must go now. I'd have brought her in, but I have no
proper conveyance yet. I'm promised something soon, perhaps it is ready
now. Good-bye! Be sure to come!"

The Harvester drove to a livery barn and examined a little horse, a
shining black creature that seemed gentle and spirited. He thought
favourably of it. A few days before he had selected a smart carriage,
and with this outfit tied behind the wagon he returned to Medicine
Woods. He left the horse at the bridge, stabled Betsy, and then returned
for the new conveyance, driving it to the hitching post. At the sound of
unexpected wheels the Girl lifted her head and stared at the turnout.

"Come on!" cried the Harvester opening the screen. "We are going to the
woods to initiate your carriage."

She went with little cries of surprised wonder.

"This is how you travel to Onabasha to do your shopping, to call on Mrs.
Carey and the friends you will make, and visit the library. When I've
tried out Mr. Horse enough to prove him reliable as guaranteed, he is
yours, for your purposes only, and when you grow wonderfully well and
strong, we'll sell him and buy you a real live horse and a stanhope,
such as city ladies have; and there must be a saddle so that you can
ride."

"Oh I'd love that!" cried the Girl. "I always wanted to ride! Where are
we going?"

"To show you Medicine Woods," said the Harvester. "I've been waiting
for this. You see there are several hundred acres of trees, thickets,
shrubs, and herb beds up there, and if the wagon road that winds between
them were stretched straight it would be many miles in length, so we
have a cool, shaded, perfumed driveway all our own. Let me get you a
drink before you start and the little shawl. It's chilly there compared
with here. Now are you comfortable and ready?"

"Yes," said the Girl. "Hurry! I've just longed to go, but I didn't like
to ask."

"I am sorry," said the Harvester. "Living here for years alone and never
having had a sister, how am I going to know what a girl would like if
you don't tell me? I knew it would be too tiresome for you to walk, and
I was waiting to find a reliable horse and a suitable carriage."

"You won't scratch or spoil it up there?"

"I'll lower the top. It is not as wide as the wagon, so nothing will
touch it."

"This is just so lovely, and such a wonderful treat, do you observe that
I'm not saying a word about extravagance?" asked the Girl, as she leaned
back in the carriage and inhaled the invigorating wood air.

The horse climbed the hill, and the Harvester guided him down long, dim
roads through deep forest, while he explained what large thickets of
bushes were, why he grew them, how he collected the roots or bark, for
what each was used and its value. On and on they went, the way ahead
always appearing as if it were too narrow to pass, yet proving amply
wide when reached. Excited redbirds darted among the bushes, and the
Harvester answered their cry. Blackbirds protested against the unusual
intrusion of strange objects, and a brown thrush slipped from a late
nest close the road wailing in anxiety.

One after another the Harvester introduced the Girl to the best trees,
speculated on their age, previous history, and pointed out which brought
large prices for lumber and which had medicinal bark and roots. On and
on they slowly drove through the woods, past the big beds of cranesbill,
violets, and lilies. He showed her where the mushrooms were most
numerous, and for the first time told the story of how he had sold them
and the violets from door to door in Onabasha in his search for her, and
the amazed Girl sat staring at him. He told of Doctor Carey having seen
her once, and inquired as they passed the bed if the yellow violets had
revived. He stopped to search and found a few late ones, deep among the
leaves.

"Oh if I only had known that!" cried the Girl, "I would have kept them
forever."

"No need," said the Harvester. "Here and now I present you with the sole
ownership of the entire white and yellow violet beds. Next spring you
shall fill your room. Won't that be a treat?"

"One money never could buy!" cried the Girl.

"Seems to be my strong point," commented the Harvester. "The most I have
to offer worth while is something you can't buy. There is a fine fairy
platform. They can spare you one. I'll get it."

The Harvester broke from a tree a large fan-shaped fungus, the surface
satin fine, the base mossy, and explained to the Girl that these were
the ballrooms of the woods, the floors on which the little people dance
in the moonlight at their great celebrations. Then he added a piece
of woolly dog moss, and showed her how each separate spine was like a
perfect little evergreen tree.

"That is where the fairies get their Christmas pines," he explained.

"Do you honestly believe in fairies?"

"Surely!" exclaimed the Harvester. "Who would tell me when the maples
are dripping sap, and the mushrooms springing up, if the fairies didn't
whisper in the night? Who paints the flower faces, colours the leaves,
enamels the ripening fruit with bloom, and frosts the window pane to let
me know that it is time to prepare for winter? Of course! They are my
friends and everyday helpers. And the winds are good to me. They carry
down news when tree bloom is out, when the pollen sifts gold from the
bushes, and it's time to collect spring roots. The first bluebird always
brings me a message. Sometimes he comes by the middle of February, again
not until late March. Always on his day, Belshazzar decides my fate for
a year. Six years we've played that game; now it is ended in blessed
reality. In the woods and at my work I remain until I die, with a few
outside tries at medicine making. I am putting up some compounds in
which I really have faith. Of course they have got to await their time
to be tested, but I believe in them. I have grown stuff so carefully,
gathered it according to rules, washed it decently, and dried and mixed
it with such scrupulous care. Night after night I've sat over the books
until midnight and later, studying combinations; and day after day I've
stood in the laboratory testing and trying, and two or three will prove
effective, or I've a disappointment coming."

"You haven't wasted time! I'd much rather take medicines you make than
any at the pharmacies. Several times I've thought I'd ask you if you
wouldn't give me some of yours. The prescription Doctor Carey sent does
no good. I've almost drunk it, and I am constantly tired, just the
same. You make me something from these tonics and stimulants you've been
telling me about. Surely you can help me!"

"I've got one combination that's going to save life, in my expectations.
But Ruth, it never has been tried, and I couldn't experiment on the very
light of my eyes with it. If I should give you something and you'd grow
worse as a result--I am a strong man, my girl, but I couldn't endure
that. I'd never dare. But dear, I am expecting Carey and his wife out
any time; probably they will come to-day, it's so beautiful; and when
they do, for my sake, won't you talk with him, tell him exactly what
made you ill, and take what he gives you? He's a great man. He was
recently President of the National Association of Surgeons. Long ago he
abandoned general practice, but he will prescribe for you; all his art
is at your command. It's quite an honour, Ruth. He performs all kinds
of miracles, and saves life every day. He had not seen you, and what he
gave me was only by guess. He may not think it is the right thing at all
after he meets you."

"Then I am really ill?"

"No. You only have the germs of illness in your blood, and if you
will help me that much we can eliminate them; and then it is you for
housekeeper, with first assistant in me, the drawing tools, paint
box, and all the woods for subjects. So, as I was going to tell you,
Belshazzar and I have played our game for the last time. That decision
was ultimate. Here I will work, live, and die. Here, please God,
strong and happy, you shall live with me. Ruth, you have got to recover
quickly. You will consult the doctor?"

"Yes, and I wish he would hurry," said the Girl. "He can't make me new
too soon to suit me. If I had a strong body, oh Man, I just feel as if
you could find a soul somewhere in it that would respond to all these
wonders you have brought me among. Oh! make me well, and I'll try as
woman never did before to bring you happiness to pay for it."

"Careful now," warned the Harvester. "There is to be no talk of
obligations between you and me. Your presence here and your growing
trust in me are all I ask at the hands of fate at present. Long ago I
learned to 'labour and to wait.' By the way----here's my most difficult
labour and my longest wait. This is the precious gingseng bed."

"How pretty!" exclaimed the Girl.

Covering acres of wood floor, among the big trees, stretched the lacy
green carpet. On slender, upright stalks waved three large leaves, each
made up of five stemmed, ovate little leaves, round at the base, sharply
pointed at the tip. A cluster of from ten to twenty small green berries,
that would turn red later, arose above. The Harvester lifted a plant
to show the Girl that the Chinese name, Jin-chen, meaning man-like,
originated because the divided root resembled legs. Away through the
woods stretched the big bed, the growth waving lightly in the wind, the
peculiar odour filling the air.

"I am going to wait to gather the crop until the seeds are ripe," said
the Harvester, "then bury some as I dig a root. My father said that was
the way of the Indians. It's a mighty good plan. The seeds are delicate,
and difficult to gather and preserve properly. Instead of collecting and
selling all of them to start rivals in the business, I shall replant my
beds. I must find a half dozen assistants to harvest this crop in that
way, and it will be difficult, because it will come when my neighbours
are busy with corn."

"Maybe I can help you."

"Not with ginseng digging," laughed the Harvester. "That is not woman's
work. You may sit in an especially attractive place and boss the job."

"Oh dear!" cried the Girl. "Oh dear! I want to get out and walk."

Gradually they had climbed the summit of the hill, descended on the
other side, and followed the road through the woods until they reached
the brier patches, fruit trees; and the garden of vegetables, with big
beds of sage, rue, wormwood, hoarhound, and boneset. From there to the
lake sloped the sunny fields of mullein and catnip, and the earth was
molten gold with dandelion creeping everywhere.

"Too hot to-day," cautioned the Harvester. "Too rough walking. Wait
until fall, and I have a treat there for you. Another flower I want you
to love because I do."

"I will," said the Girl promptly. "I feel it in my heart."

"Well I am glad you feel something besides the ache of fever," said the
Harvester. Then noticing her tired face he added: "Now this little horse
had quite a trip from town, and the wheels cut deeply into this woods
soil and make difficult pulling, so I wonder if I had not better put
him in the stable and let him become acquainted with Betsy. I don't know
what she will think. She has had sole possession for years. Maybe she
will be jealous, perhaps she will be as delighted for company as her
master. Ruth, if you could have heard what I said to Belshazzar when he
decided I was to go courting this year, and seen what I did to him, and
then take a look at me now----merciful powers, I hope the dog doesn't
remember! If he does, no wonder he forms a new allegiance so easily.
Have you observed that lately when I whistle, he starts, and then turns
back to see if you want him? He thinks as much of you as he does of me
right now."

"Oh no!" cried the Girl. "That couldn't be possible. You told me I must
make friends with him, so I have given him food, and tried to win him."

"You sit in the carriage until I put away the horse, and then I'll help
you to the cabin, and save you being alone while I work. Would you like
that?"

"Yes."

She leaned her head against the carriage top the Harvester had raised to
screen her, and watched him stable the horse. Evidently he was very fond
of animals for he talked as if it were a child he was undressing and
kept giving it extra strokes and pats as he led it away. Ajax disliked
the newcomer instantly, noticed the carriage and the woman's dress, and
screamed his ugliest. The Girl smiled. As the Harvester appeared she
inquired, "Is Ajax now sending a wireless to Ceylon asking for a mate?"

The Harvester looked at her quizzically and saw a gleam of mischief in
the usually dull dark eyes that delighted him.

"That is the customary supposition when he finds voice," he said. "But
since this has become your home, you are bound to learn some of my
secrets. One of them I try to guard is the fact that Ajax has a temper.
No my dear, he is not always sending a wireless, I am sorry to say. I
wish he was! As a matter of fact he is venting his displeasure at any
difference in our conditions. He hates change. He learned that from me.
I will enjoy seeing him come for favour a year from now, as I learned
to come for it, even when I didn't get much, and the road lay west of
Onabasha. Ajax, stop that! There's no use to object. You know you think
that horse is nice company for you, and that two can feed you more than
one. Don't be a hypocrite! Cease crying things you don't mean, and learn
to love the people I do. Come on, old boy!"

The peacock came, but with feathers closely pressed and stepping
daintily. As the bird advanced, the Harvester retreated, until he stood
beside the Girl, and then he slipped some grain to her hand and she
offered it. But Ajax would not be coaxed. He was too fat and well fed.
He haughtily turned and marched away, screaming at intervals.

"Nasty temper!" commented the Harvester. "Never mind! He soon will
become accustomed to you, and then he will love you as Belshazzar does.
Feed the doves instead. They are friendly enough in all conscience. Do
you notice that there is not a  feather among them? The squab
that is hatched with one you may have for breakfast. Now let's go find
something to eat, and I will finish the bridge so you can rest there
to-night and watch the sun set on Singing Water."

So they went into the cabin and prepared food, and then the Harvester
told the Girl to make herself so pretty that she would be a picture and
come and talk to him while he finished the roof. She went to her room,
found a pale lavender linen dress and put it on, dusted the pink powder
thickly, and went where a wide bench made an inviting place in the
shade. There she sat and watched her lightly expressed whim take shape.

"Soon as this is finished," said the Harvester, "I am going to begin on
that tea table. I can make it in a little while, if you want it to match
the other furniture."

"I do," said the Girl.

"Wonder if you could draw a plan showing how it should appear. I am a
little shy on tea tables."

"I think I can."

The Harvester brought paper, pencil, and a shingle for a drawing pad.

"Now remember one thing," he said. "If you are in earnest about using
those old blue dishes, this has got to be a big, healthy table. A little
one will appear top heavy with them. It would be a good idea to set out
what you want to use, arranged as you would like them, and let me take
the top measurement that way."

"All right! I'll only indicate how its legs should be and we will
find the size later. I could almost weep because that wonderful set is
broken. If I had all of it I'd be so proud!"

The Girl bent over the drawing. The Harvester worked with his attention
divided between her, the bridge, and the road. At last he saw the big
red car creeping up the valley.

"Seems to be some one coming, Ruth! Guess it must be Doc. I'll go open
the gate?"

"Yes," said the Girl. "I'm so glad. You won't forget to ask him to help
me if he can?"

The Harvester wheeled hastily. "I won't forget!" he said, as he hurried
to the gate. The car ran slowly, and the Girl could see him swing to
the step and stand talking as they advanced. When they reached her they
stopped and all of them came forward. She went to meet them. She shook
hands with Mrs. Carey and then with the doctor.

"I am so glad you have come," she said.

"I hope you are not lonesome already," laughed the doctor.

"I don't think any one with brains to appreciate half of this ever could
become lonely here," answered the Girl. "No, it isn't that."

"A-ha!" cried the doctor, turning to his wife. "You see that the
beautiful young lady remembers me, and has been wishing I would come. I
always said you didn't half appreciate me. What a place you are making,
David! I'll run the car to the shade and join you."

For a long time they talked under the trees, then they went to see the
new home and all its furnishings.

"Now this is what I call comfort," said the doctor. "David, build us a
house exactly similar to this over there on the hill, and let us live
out here also. I'd love it. Would you, Clara?"

"I don't know. I never lived in the country. One thing is sure: If I
tried it, I'd prefer this to any other place I ever saw. David, won't
you take me far enough up the hill that I can look from the top to the
lake?"

"Certainly," said the Harvester. "Excuse us a little while, Ruth!"

As soon as they were gone the Girl turned to the doctor.

"Doctor Carey, David says you are great. Won't you exercise your art on
me. I am not at all well, and oh! I'd so love to be strong and sound."

"Will you tell me," asked the doctor, "just enough to show me what
caused the trouble?"

"Bad air and water, poor light and food at irregular times, overwork and
deep sorrow; every wrong condition of life you could imagine, with not a
ray of hope in the distance, until now. For the sake of the Harvester, I
would be well again. Please, please try to cure me!"

So they talked until the doctor thought he knew all he desired, and then
they went to see the gold flower garden.

"I call this simply superb," said he, taking a seat beneath the tree
roof of her porch. "Young woman, I don't know what I'll do to you if you
don't speedily grow strong here. This is the prettiest place I ever saw,
and listen to the music of that bubbling, gurgling little creek!"

"Isn't he wonderful?" asked the Girl, looking up the hill, where the
tall form of the Harvester could be seen moving around. "Just to see
him, you would think him the essence of manly strength and force. And
he is! So strong! Into the lake at all hours, at the dry-house, on the
hill, grubbing roots, lifting big pillars to support a bridge roof,
and with it all a fancy as delicate as any dreaming girl. Doctor, the
fairies paint the flowers, colour the fruit, and frost the windows for
him; and the winds carry pollen to tell him when his growing things are
ready for the dry-house. I don't suppose I can tell you anything new
about him; but isn't he a perpetual surprise? Never like any one else!
And no matter how he startles me in the beginning, he always ends by
convincing me, at least, that he is right."

"I never loved any other man as I do him," said the doctor. "I ushered
him into the world when I was a young man just beginning to practise,
and I've known him ever since. I know few men so scrupulously clean. Try
to get well and make him happy, Mrs. Langston. He so deserves it."

"You may be sure I will," answered the Girl.

After the visitors had gone, the Harvester told her to place the old
blue dishes as she would like to arrange them on her table, so he could
get a correct idea of the size, and he left to put a few finishing
strokes on the bridge cover. She went into the dining-room and opened
the china closet. She knew from her peep in the work-room that there
would be more pieces than she had seen before; but she did not think
or hope that a full half dozen tea set and plates, bowl, platter, and
pitcher would be waiting for her.

"Why Ruth, what made you tire yourself to come down? I intended to
return in a few minutes."

"Oh Man!" cried the laughing Girl, as she clung pantingly to a bridge
pillar for support, "I just had to come to tell you. There are fairies!
Really truly ones! They have found the remainder of the willow dishes
for me, and now there are so many it isn't going to be a table at all.
It must be a little cupboard especially for them, in that space between
the mantel and the bookcase. There should be a shining brass tea
canister, and a wafer box like the arts people make, and I'll pour tea
and tend the chafing dish and you can toast the bread with a long fork
over the coals, and we will have suppers on the living-room table, and
it will be such fun."

"Be seated!" cried the Harvester. "Ruth, that's the longest speech I
ever heard you make, and it sounded, praise the Lord, like a girl. Did
Doc say he would fix something for you?"

"Yes, such a lot of things! I am going to shut my eyes and open my mouth
and swallow all of them. I'm going to be born again and forget all I
ever knew before I came here, and soon I will be tagging you everywhere,
begging you to suggest designs for my pencil, and I'll simply force life
to come right for you."

The Harvester smiled.

"Sounds good!" he said. "But, Ruth, I'm a little dubious about force
work. Life won't come right for me unless you learn to love me, and
love is a stubborn, contrary bulldog element of our nature that won't
be driven an inch. It wanders as the wind, and strikes us as it will.
You'll arrive at what I hope for much sooner if you forget it and amuse
yourself and be as happy as you can. Then, perhaps all unknown to you,
a little spark of tenderness for me will light in your breast; and if it
ever does we will buy a fanning mill and put it in operation, and we'll
raise a flame or know why."

"And there won't be any force in that?"

"What you can't compel is the start. It's all right to push any growth
after you have something to work on."

"That reminds me," said the Girl, "there is a question I want to ask
you."

"Go ahead!" said the Harvester, glancing at her as he hewed a joist.

She turned away her face and sat looking across the lake for a long
time.

"Is it a difficult question, Ruth?" inquired the Harvester to help her.

"Yes," said the Girl. "I don't know how to make you see."

"Take any kind of a plunge. I'm not usually dense."

"It is really quite simple after all. It's about a girl----a girl I
knew very well in Chicago. She had a problem----and it worried her
dreadfully, and I just wondered what you would think of it."

The Harvester shifted his position so that he could watch the side of
the averted face.

"You'll have to tell me, before I can tell you," he suggested.

"She was a girl who never had anything from life but work and worry. Of
course, that's the only kind I'd know! One day when the work was most
difficult, and worry cut deepest, and she really thought she was losing
her mind, a man came by and helped her. He lifted her out, and rescued
all that was possible for a man to save to her in honour, and went his
way. There wasn't anything more. Probably there never would be. His
heart was great, and he stooped and pitied her gently and passed on.
After a time another man came by, a good and noble man, and he offered
her love so wonderful she hadn't brains to comprehend how or why it
was."

The Girl's voice trailed off as if she were too weary to speak further,
while she leaned her head against a pillar and gazed with dull eyes
across the lake.

"And your question," suggested the Harvester at last.

She roused herself. "Oh, the question! Why this----if in time, and
after she had tried and tried, love to equal his simply would not come
would----would----she be wrong to PRETEND she cared, and do the very
best she could, and hope for real love some day? Oh David, would she?"

The Harvester's face was whiter than the Girl's. He pounded the chisel
into the joist savagely.

"Would she, David?"

"Let me understand you clearly," said the man in a dry, breathless
voice. "Did she love this first man to whom she came under obligations?"

The Girl sat gazing across the lake and the tortured Harvester stared at
her.

"I don't know," she said at last. "I don't know whether she knew what
love was or ever could. She never before had known a man; her heart was
as undeveloped and starved as her body. I don't think she realized love,
but there was a SOMETHING. Every time she would feel most grateful and
long for the love that was offered her, that 'something' would awake and
hurt her almost beyond endurance. Yet she knew he never would come. She
knew he did not care for her. I don't know that she felt she wanted him,
but she was under such obligations to him that it seemed as if she must
wait to see if he might not possibly come, and if he did she should be
free."

"If he came, she preferred him?"

"There was a debt she had to pay----if he asked it. I don't know whether
she preferred him. I do know she had no idea that he would come, but the
POSSIBILITY was always before her. If he didn't come in time, would she
be wrong in giving all she had to the man who loved her?"

The Harvester's laugh was short and sharp.

"She had nothing to give, Ruth! Talk about worm-wood, colocynth apples,
and hemlock! What sort of husks would that be to offer a man who gave
honest love? Lie to him! Pretend feeling she didn't experience. Endure
him for the sake of what he offered her? Well I don't know how calmly
any other man would take that proceeding, Ruth, but tell your friend for
me, that if I offered a woman the deep, lasting, and only loving passion
of my heart, and she gave back a lie and indifferent lips, I'd drop her
into the deepest hole of my lake and take my punishment cheerfully."

"But if it would make him happy? He deserves every happiness, and he
need never know!"

The Harvester's laugh raised to an angry roar.

"You simpleton!" he cried roughly. "Do you know so little of human
passion in the heart that you think love can be a successful assumption?
Good Lord, Ruth! Do you think a man is made of wood or stone, that a
woman's lips in her first kiss wouldn't tell him the truth? Why Girl,
you might as well try to spread your tired arms and fly across the lake
as to attempt to pretend a love you do not feel. You never could!"

"I said a girl I knew!"

"'A Girl you knew,' then! Any woman! The idea is monstrous. Tell her so
and forget it. You almost scared the life out of me for a minute, Ruth.
I thought it was going to be you. But I remember your debt is to be paid
with the first money you earn, and you can not have the slightest idea
what love is, if you honestly ask if it can be simulated. No ma'am! It
can't! Not possibly! Not ever! And when the day comes that its fires
light your heart, you will come to me, and tell of a flood of delight
that is tingling from the soles of your feet through every nerve and
fibre of your body, and you will laugh with me at the time when you
asked if it could be imitated successfully. No, ma'am! Now let me help
you to the cabin, serve a good supper, and see you eat like a farmer."

All evening the Harvester was so gay he kept the Girl laughing and at
last she asked him the cause.

"Relief, honey! Relief!" cried the man. "You had me paralyzed for a
minute, Ruth. I thought you were trying to tell me that there was some
one so possessing your heart that it failed every time you tried
to think about caring for me. If you hadn't convinced me before you
finished that love never has touched you, I'd be the saddest man in the
world to-night, Ruth."

The Girl stared at him with wide eyes and silently turned away.

Then for a week they worked out life together in the woods. The
Harvester was the housekeeper and the cook. He added to his store many
delicious broths and stimulants he brought from the city. They drove
every day through the cool woods, often rowed on the lake in the
evenings, walked up the hill to the oak and scattered fresh flowers
on the two mounds there, and sat beside them talking for a time. The
Harvester kept up his work with the herbs, and the little closet for
the blue dishes was finished. They celebrated installing them by having
supper on the living-room table, with the teapot on one end, and the
pitcher full of bellflowers on the other.

The Girl took everything prescribed for her, bathed, slept all she
could, and worked for health with all the force of her frail being, and
as the days went by it seemed to the Harvester her weight grew lighter,
her hands hotter, and she drove herself to a gayety almost delirious. He
thought he would have preferred a dull, stupid sleep of malaria. There
was colour in plenty on her cheeks now, and sometimes he found her
wrapped in the white shawl at noon on the warmest days Medicine Woods
knew in early August; and on cool nights she wore the thinnest clothing
and begged to be taken on the lake. The Careys came out every other
evening and the doctor watched and worked, but he did not get the
results he desired. His medicines were not effective.

"David," he said one evening, "I don't like the looks of this. Your wife
has fever I can't break. It is eating the little store of vitality she
has right out of her, and some of these days she is coming down with a
crash. She should yield to the remedies I am giving her. She acts to
me like a woman driven wild by trouble she is concealing. Do you know
anything that worries her?"

"No," said the Harvester, "but I'll try to find out if it will help you
in your work."

After they were gone he left the Girl lying in the swing guarded by the
dog, and went across the marsh on the excuse that he was going to a bed
of thorn apple at the foot of the hill. There he sat on a log and tried
to think. With the mists of night rising around him, ghosts arose he
fain would have escaped. "What will you give me in cold cash to tell you
who she is, and who her people are?" Times untold in the past two weeks
he had smothered, swallowed, and choked it down. That question she had
wanted to ask----was it for a girl she had known, or was it for herself?
Days of thought had deepened the first slight impression he so bravely
had put aside, not into certainty, but a great fear that she had meant
herself. If she did, what was he to do? Who was the man? There was a
debt she had to pay if he asked it? What debt could a woman pay a man
that did not involve money? Crouched on a log he suffered and twisted
in agonizing thought. At last he arose and returned to the cabin. He
carried a few frosty, blue-green leaves of velvet softness and unusual
cutting, prickly thorn apples full of seeds, and some of the smoother,
more yellowish-green leaves of the jimson weed, to give excuse for his
absence.

"Don't touch them," he warned as he came to her. "They are poison
and have disagreeable odour. But we are importing them for medicinal
purposes. On the far side of the marsh, where the ground rises, there
is a waste place just suited to them, and so long as they will seed
and flourish with no care at all, I might as well have the price as
the foreign people who raise them. They don't bring enough to make them
worth cultivating, but when they grow alone and with no care, I can make
money on the time required to clip the leaves and dry the seeds. I must
go wash before I come close to you."

The next day he had business in the city, and again she lay in the swing
and talked to the dog while the Harvester was gone. She was startled as
Belshazzar arose with a gruff bark. She looked down the driveway, but no
one was coming. Then she followed the dog's eyes and saw a queer,
little old woman coming up the bank of Singing Water from the north. She
remembered what the Harvester had said, and rising she opened the screen
and went down the path. As the Girl advanced she noticed the scrupulous
cleanliness of the calico dress and gingham apron, and the snowy hair
framing a bronzed face with dancing dark eyes.

"Are you David's new wife?" asked Granny Moreland with laughing
inflection.

"Yes," said the Girl. "Come in. He told me to expect you. I am so sorry
he is away, but we can get acquainted without him. Let me help you."

"I don't know but that ought to be the other way about. You don't look
very strong, child."

"I am not well," said the Girl, "but it's lovely here, and the air is
so fine I am going to be better soon. Take this chair until you rest a
little, and then you shall see our pretty home, and all the furniture
and my dresses."

"Yes, I want to see things. My, but David has tried himself! I heard
he was just tearin' up Jack over here, and I could get the sound of the
hammerin', and one day he asked me to come and see about his beddin'. He
had that Lizy Crofter to wash for him, but if I hadn't jest stood over
her his blankets would have been ruined. She's no more respect for
fine goods than a pig would have for cream pie. I hate to see woollens
abused, as if they were human. My, but things is fancy here since what
David planted is growin'! Did you ever live in the country before?"

"No."

"Where do you hail from?"

"Well not from the direction of hail," laughed the Girl. "I lived in
Chicago, but we were----were not rich, and so I didn't know the luxury
of the city; just the lonely, difficult part."

"Do you call Chicago lonely?"

"A thousand times more so than Medicine Woods. Here I know the trees
will whisper to me, and the water laughs and sings all day, and the
birds almost split their throats making music for me; but I can imagine
no loneliness on earth that will begin to compare with being among the
crowds and crowds of a large city and no one has a word or look for you.
I miss the sea of faces and the roar of life; at first I was almost wild
with the silence, but now I don't find it still any more; the Harvester
is teaching me what each sound means and they seem to be countless."

"You think, then, you'll like it here?"

"I do, indeed! Any one would. Even more than the beautiful location, I
love the interesting part of the Harvester's occupation. I really think
that gathering material to make medicines that will allay pain is the
very greatest of all the great work a man can do."

"Good!" cried Granny Moreland, her dark eyes snapping. "I've always
said it! I've tried to encourage David in it. And he's just capital at
puttin' some of his stuff in shape, and combinin' it in as good medicine
as you ever took. This spring I was all crippled up with the rheumatiz
until I wanted to holler every time I had to move, and sometimes it got
so aggravatin' I'm not right sure but I done it. 'Long comes David and
says, 'I can fix you somethin',' and bless you, if the boy didn't take
the tucks out of me, until here I am, and tickled to pieces that I can
get here. This time last year I didn't care if I lived or not. Now seems
as if I'm caperish as a three weeks' lamb. I don't see how a man could
do a bigger thing than to stir up life in you like that."

"I think this place makes an especial appeal to me, because, shortly
before I came, I had to give up my mother. She was very ill and suffered
horribly. Every time I see David going to his little laboratory on
the hill to work a while I slip away and ask God to help him to fix
something that will ease the pain of humanity as I should like to have
seen her relieved."

"Why you poor child! No wonder you are lookin' so thin and peaked!"

"Oh I'll soon be over that," said the Girl. "I am much better than when
I came. I'll be coming over to trade pie with you before long. David
says you are my nearest neighbour, so we must be close friends."

"Well bless your big heart! Now who ever heard of a pretty young thing
like you wantin' to be friends with a plain old country woman?"

"Why I think you are lovely!" cried the Girl. "And all of us are on the
way to age, so we must remember that we will want kindness then more
than at any other time. David says you knew his mother. Sometime won't
you tell me all about her? You must very soon. The Harvester adored her,
and Doctor Carey says she was the noblest woman he ever knew. It's a
big contract to take her place. Maybe if you would tell me all you can
remember I could profit by much of it."

Granny Moreland watched the Girl keenly.

"She wa'ant no ordinary woman, that's sure," she commented. "And she
didn't make no common man out of her son, either. I've always contended
she took the job too serious, and wore herself out at it, but she
certainly done the work up prime. If she's above cloud leanin' over the
ramparts lookin' down----though it gets me as to what foundation they
use or where they get the stuff to build the ramparts----but if they
is ramparts, and she's peekin' over them, she must take a lot of solid
satisfaction in seeing that David is not only the man she fought and
died to make him, but he's give her quite a margin to spread herself
on. She 'lowed to make him a big man, but you got to know him close
and plenty 'fore it strikes you jest what his size is. I've watched him
pretty sharp, and tried to help what I could since Marthy went, and I'm
frank to say I druther see David happy than to be happy myself. I've had
my fling. The rest of the way I'm willin' to take what comes, with the
best grace I can muster, and wear a smilin' face to betoken the joy I
have had; but it cuts me sore to see the young sufferin'."

"Do you think David is unhappy?" asked the Girl eagerly.

"I don't see how he could be!" cried the old lady. "Of course he
ain't! 'Pears as if he's got everythin' to make him the proudest, best
satisfied of men. I'll own I was mighty anxious to see you. I know
the kind o' woman it would take to make David miserable, and it seems
sometimes as if men----that is good men----are plumb, stone blind when
it comes to pickin' a woman. They jest hitch up with everlastin' misery
easy as dew rolling off a cabbage leaf. It's sech a blessed sight to see
you, and hear your voice and know you're the woman anybody can see you
be. Why I'm so happy when I set here and con-tem'-plate you, I want
to cackle like a pullet announcin' her first egg. Ain't this porch the
purtiest place?"

"Come see everything," invited the Girl, rising.

Granny Moreland followed with alacrity.

"Bare floors!" she cried. "Wouldn't that best you? I saw they was
finished capital when I was over, but I 'lowed they'd be covered afore
you come. Don't you like nice, flowery Brissels carpets, honey?"

"No I don't," said the Girl. "You see, when rugs are dusty they can be
rolled, carried outside, and cleaned. The walls can be wiped, the floors
polished and that way a house is always fresh. I can keep this shining,
germ proof, and truly clean with half the work and none of the danger of
heavy carpets and curtains."

"I don't doubt but them is true words," said Granny Moreland earnestly.
"Work must be easier and sooner done than it was in my day, or people
jest couldn't have houses the size of this or the time to gad that women
have now. From the looks of the streets of Onabasha, you wouldn't think
a woman 'ud had a baby to tend, a dinner pot a-bilin', or a bakin' of
bread sence the flood. And the country is jest as bad as the city. We're
a apin' them to beat the monkeys at a show. I hardly got a neighbour
that ain't got figgered Brissels carpet, a furnace, a windmill, a
pianny, and her own horse and buggy. Several's got autermobiles, and the
young folks are visitin' around a-ridin' the trolleys, goin' to college,
and copyin' city ways. Amos Peters, next to us; goes bareheaded in the
hay field, and wears gloves to pitch and plow in. I tell him he reminds
me of these city women that only wears the lower half of a waist and no
sleeves, and a yard of fine goods moppin' the floors. Well if that don't
'beat the nation! Ain't them Marthy's old blue dishes?"

"Let me show you!" The Girl opened the little cupboard and exhibited the
willow ware. The eyes of the old woman began to sparkle.

"Foundation or no foundation, I do hope them ramparts is a go!" she
cried. "If Marthy Langston is squintin' over them and she sees her old
chany put in a fine cupboard, and her little shawl round as purty a girl
as ever stepped, and knows her boy is gittin' what he deserves, good
Lord, she'll be like to oust the Almighty, and set on the throne
herself! 'Bout everythin' in life was a disappointment to her, 'cept
David. Now if she could see this! Won't I rub it into the neighbours?
And my boys' wives!"

"I don't understand," said the bewildered Girl.

"'Course you don't, honey," explained the visitor. "It's like this: I
don't know anybody, man or woman, in these parts, that ain't rampagin'
for CHANGE. They ain't one of them that would live in a log cabin,
though they's not a house in twenty miles of here that fits its
surroundin's and looks so homelike as this. They run up big, fancy brick
and frame things, all turns and gables and gay as frosted picnic pie,
and work and slave to git these very carpets you say ain't healthy,
and the chairs you say you wouldn't give house room, an' they use their
grandmother's chany for bakin', scraps, and grease dishes, and hide it
if they's visitors. All of them strainin' after something they can't
afford, and that ain't healthy when they git it, because somebody else
is doin' the same thing. Mary Peters says she is afeared of her life in
their new steam wagon, and she says Andy gits so narvous runnin' it, he
jest keeps on a-jerkin' and drivin' all night, and she thinks he'll
soon go to smash himself, if the machine doesn't beat him. But they
are keepin' it up, because Graceston's is, and so it goes all over the
country. Now I call it a slap right in the face to have a Chicagy woman
come to the country to live and enjoy a log cabin, bare floors, and her
man's grandmother's dishes. If there ain't Marthy's old blue coverlid
also carefully spread on a splinter new sofy. Landy, I can't wait to get
to my son John's! He's got a woman that would take two coppers off the
collection plate while she was purtendin' to put on one, if she could,
and then spend them for a brass pin or a string of glass beads. Won't
her eyes bung when I tell her about this? She wanted my Peter Hartman
kiver for her ironin' board. Show me the rest!"

"This is the dining-room," said the Girl, leading the way.

Granny Moreland stepped in and sent her keen eyes ranging over the
floor, walls, and furnishings. She sank on a chair and said with a
chuckle, "Now you go on and tell me all about it, honey. Jest what
things are and why you fixed them, and how they are used."

The Girl did her best, and the old woman nodded in delighted approval.

"It's the purtiest thing I ever saw," she announced. "A minute ago, I'd
'a' said them blue walls back there, jest like October skies in Indian
summer, and the brown rugs, like leaves in the woods, couldn't be beat;
but this green and yaller is purtier yet. That blue room will keep the
best lookin' part of fall on all winter, and with a roarin' wood fire,
it'll be capital, and no mistake; but this here is spring, jest spring
eternal, an' that's best of all. Looks like it was about time the leaves
was bustin' and things pushin' up. It wouldn't surprise me a mite to see
a flock of swallers come sailin' right through these winders. And here's
a place big enough to lay down and rest a spell right handy to the
kitchen, where a-body gits tiredest, without runnin' a half mile to find
a bed, and in the mornin' you can look down to the 'still waters'; and
in the afternoon, when the sun gits around here, you can pull that blind
and 'lift your eyes to the hills,' like David of the Bible says. My,
didn't he say the purtiest things! I never read nothin' could touch
him!"

"Have you seen the Psalms arranged in verse as we would write it now?"

"You don't mean to tell me David's been put into real poetry?"

"Yes. Some Bibles have all the poetical books in our forms of verse."

"Well! Sometimes I git kind o' knocked out! As a rule I hold to old
ways. I think they're the healthiest and the most faver'ble to the soul.
But they's some changes come along, that's got sech hard common-sense
to riccomend them, that I wonder the past generations didn't see sooner.
Now take this! An hour ago I'd told you I'd read my father's Bible to
the end of my days. But if they's a new one that's got David, Solomon,
and Job in nateral form, I'll have one, and I'll git a joy I never
expected out of life. I ain't got so much poetry in me, but it always
riled me to read, '7. The law of the Lord is perfect, covertin' the
soul. 8. The statutes of the Lord are right. 9. The fear of the Lord
is clean.' And so it goes on, 'bout as much figgers as they is poetry.
Always did worry me. So if they make Bibles 'cordin' to common sense,
I'll have one to-morrow if I have to walk to Onabasha to get it. Lawsy
me! if you ain't gathered up Marthy's old pink tea set, and give it a
show, too! Did you do that to please David, or do you honestly think
them is nice dishes?"

"I think they are beautiful," laughed the Girl, sinking to a chair. "I
don't know that it did please him. He had been studying the subject,
but something saved him from buying anything until I came. I'd have felt
dreadfully if he had gotten what he wanted."

"What did he want, honey?" asked the old lady in an awestruck whisper.

"Egg-shell china and cut glass."

"And you wouldn't let him! Woman! What do you want?"

"A set of tulip-yellow dishes, with Dutch little figures on them. They
are so quaint and they would harmonize perfectly with this room."

The old lady laughed gleefully.

"My! I wouldn't 'a' missed this for a dollar," she cried. "It jest does
my soul good. More'n that, if you really like Marthy's dishes and are
going to take care of them and use them right, I'll give you mine, too.
I ain't never had a girl. I've always hoped she'd 'a' had some jedgment
of her own, and not been eternally apin', if I had, but the Lord may 'a'
saved me many a disappointment by sendin' all mine boys. Not that I'm
layin' the babies on to the Lord at all----I jest got into the habit of
sayin' that, 'cos everybody else does, but all mine, I had a purty
good idy how I got them. If a girl of mine wouldn't 'a' had more sense,
raised right with me, I'd' a' been purty bad cut up over it. Of course,
I can't be held responsible for the girls my boys married, but t'other
day Emmeline----that's John's wife----John is the youngest, and I sort
o' cling to him----Emmeline she says to me, 'Mother, can't I have this
old pink and green teapot?' My heart warmed right up to the child, and
I says, 'What do you want it for, Emmeline?' And she says, 'To draw the
tea in.' Cracky Dinah! That fool woman meant to set my grandmother's
weddin' present from her pa and ma, dishes same as Marthy Washington
used, on the stove to bile the tea in. I jest snorted! 'No, says I, 'you
can't! 'Fore I die,' says I, 'I'll meet up with some woman that 'll love
dishes and know how to treat them.' I think jest about as much of David
as I do my own boys, and I don't make no bones of the fact that he's a
heap more of a man. I'd jest as soon my dishes went to his children
as to John's. I'll give you every piece I got, if you'll take keer of
them."

"Would it be right?" wavered the girl.

"Right! Why, I'm jest tellin' you the fool wimmen would bile tea in
them, make grease sassers of them, and use them to dish up the bakin'
on! Wouldn't you a heap rather see them go into a cupboard like David's
ma's is in, where they'd be taken keer of, if they was yours? I guess
you would!"

"Well if you feel that way, and really want us to have them, I know
David will build another little cupboard on the other side of the
fireplace to put yours in, and I can't tell you how I'd love and care
for them."

"I'll jest do it!" said Granny Moreland. "I got about as many blue ones
as Marthy had an' mine are purtier than hers. And my lustre is brighter,
for I didn't use it so much. Is this the kitchen? Well if I ever saw
sech a cool, white place to cook in before! Ain't David the beatenest
hand to think up things? He got the start of that takin' keer of his
ma all his life. He sort of learned what a woman uses, and how it's
handiest. Not that other men don't know; it's jest that they are too
mortal selfish and keerless to fix things. Well this is great! Now when
you bile cabbage and the wash, always open your winders wide and let the
steam out, so it won't spile your walls."

"I'll be very careful," promised the Girl. "Now come see my bathroom,
closet and bedroom."

"Well as I live! Ain't this fine. I'll bet a purty that if I'd 'a' had
a room and a trough like this to soak in when I was wore to a frazzle, I
wouldn't 'a' got all twisted up with rheumatiz like I am. It jest looks
restful to see. I never washed in a place like this in all my days. Must
feel grand to be wet all over at once! Now everybody ought to have sech
a room and use it at all hours, like David does the lake. Did you ever
see his beat to go swimmin'? He's always in splashin'! Been at it all
his life. I used to be skeered when he was a little tyke. He soaked so
much 'peared like he'd wash all the substance out of him, but it only
made him strong."

"Has he ever been ill?"

"Not that I know of, and I reckon I'd knowed it if he had. Well what a
clothespress! I never saw so many dresses at once. Ain't they purty? Oh
I wish I was young, and could have one like that yaller. And I'd like to
have one like your lavender right now. My! You are lucky to have so many
nice clothes. It's a good thing most girls haven't got them, or they'd
stand primpin' all day tryin' to decide which one to put on. I don't see
how you tell yourself."

"I wear the one that best hides how pale I am," answered the Girl. "I
use the colours now. When I grow plump and rosy, I'll wear the white."

Granny Moreland dropped on the couch and assured herself that it was
Martha's pink Peter Hartman. Then she examined the sunshine room.

"Well I got to go back to the start," she said at last. "This beats the
dinin'-room. This is the purtiest thing I ever saw. Oh I do hope they
ain't so run to white in Heaven as some folks seem to think! Used to be
scandalized if a-body took anythin' but a white flower to a funeral. Now
they tell me that when Jedge Stilton's youngest girl come from New York
to her pa's buryin' she fetched about a wash tub of blood-red roses.
Put them all over him, too! Said he loved red roses livin' and so he
was goin' to have them when he passed over. Now if they are lettin' up a
little on white on earth, mebby some of the stylish ones will carry the
fashion over yander. If Heaven is like this, I won't spend none of my
time frettin' about the foundations. I'll jest forget there is any, even
if we do always have to be so perticler to get them solid on earth. Talk
of gold harps! Can't you almost hear them? And listen to the birds and
that water! Say, you won't get lonesome here, will you?"

"Indeed no!" answered the Girl. "Wouldn't you like to lie on my
beautiful couch that the Harvester made with his own hands, and I'll
spread Mother Langston's coverlet over you and let you look at all my
pretty things while I slip away a few minutes to something I'd like to
do?"

"I'd love to!" said the old woman. "I never had a chance at such fine
things. David told me he was makin' your room all himself, and that he
was goin' to fill it chuck full of everythin' a girl ever used, and
I see he done it right an' proper. Away last March he told me he was
buildin' for you, an' I hankered so to have a woman here again, even
though I never s'posed she'd be sochiable like you, that I egged him
on jest all I could. I never would 'a' s'posed the boy could marry like
this----all by himself."

The Girl went to the ice chest to bring some of the fruit juice, chilled
berries, and to the pantry for bread and wafers to make a dainty little
lunch that she placed on the veranda table; and then she and Granny
Moreland talked, until the visitor said that she must go. The Girl went
with her to the little bridge crossing Singing Water on the north. There
the old lady took her hand.

"Honey," she said, "I'm goin' to tell you somethin'. I am so happy I can
purt near fly. Last night I was comin' down the pike over there chasin'
home a contrary old gander of mine, and I looked over on your land and
I see David settin' on a log with his head between his hands a lookin'
like grim death, if I ever see it. My heart plum stopped. Says I, 'she's
a failure! She's a bustin' the boy's heart! I'll go straight over and
tell her so.' I didn't dare bespeak him, but I was on nettles all night.
I jest laid a-studyin' and a-studyin', and I says, 'Come mornin' I'll
go straight and give her a curry-combin' that'll do her good.' And I
started a-feelin' pretty grim, and here you came to meet me, and
wiped it all out of my heart in a flash. It did look like the boy was
grievin'; but I know now he was jest thinkin' up what to put together
to take the ache out of some poor old carcass like mine. It never could
have been about you. Like a half blind old fool I thought the boy was
sufferin', and here he was only studyin'! Like as not he was thinkin'
what to do next to show you how he loves you. What an old silly I was!
I'll sleep like a log to-night to pay up for it. Good-bye, honey! You
better go back and lay down a spell. You do look mortal tired."

The Girl said good-bye and staggering a few steps sank on a log and sat
staring at the sky.

"Oh he was suffering, and about me!" she gasped. A chill began to shake
her and feverish blood to race through her veins. "He does and gives
everything; I do and give nothing! Oh why didn't I stay at Uncle Henry's
until it ended? It wouldn't have been so bad as this. What will I do? Oh
what will I do? Oh mother, mother! if I'd only had the courage you did."

She arose and staggered up the hill, passed the cabin and went to the
oak. There she sank shivering to earth, and laid her face among the
mosses. The frightened Harvester found her at almost dusk when he came
from the city with the Dutch dishes, and helped a man launch a gay
little motor boat for her on the lake.

"Why Ruth! Ruth-girl!" he exclaimed, kneeling beside her.

She lifted a strained, distorted face.

"Don't touch me! Don't come near me!" she cried. "It is not true that I
am better. I am not! I am worse! I never will be better. And before I go
I've got to tell you of the debt I owe; then you will hate me, and then
I will be glad! Glad, I tell you! Glad! When you despise me? then I can
go, and know that some day you will love a girl worthy of you. Oh I want
you to hate me I am fit for nothing else."

She fell forward sobbing wildly and the Harvester tried in vain to quiet
her. At last he said, "Well then tell me, Ruth. Remember I don't want to
hear what you have to say. I will believe nothing against you, not even
from your own lips, when you are feverish and excited as now, but if
it will quiet you, tell me and have it over. See, I will sit here and
listen, and when you have finished I'll pick you up and carry you to
your room, and I am not sure but I will kiss you over and over. What is
it you want to tell me, Ruth?"

She sat up panting and pushed back the heavy coils of hair.

"I've got to begin away at the beginning to make you see," she said.
"The first thing I can remember is a small, such a small room, and
mother sewing and sometimes a man I called father. He was like Henry
Jameson made over tall and smooth, and more, oh, much more heartless! He
was gone long at a time, and always we had most to eat, and went oftener
to the parks, and were happiest with him away. When I was big enough to
understand, mother told me that she had met him and cared for him when
she was an inexperienced girl. She must have been very, very young, for
she was only a girl as I first remember her, and oh! so lovely, but
with the saddest face I ever saw. She said she had a good home and every
luxury, and her parents adored her; but they knew life and men, and they
would not allow him in their home, and so she left it with him, and he
married her and tried to force them to accept him, and they would not.
At first she bore it. Later she found him out, and appealed to them,
but they were away or would not forgive, and she was a proud thing, and
would not beg more after she had said she was wrong, and would they take
her back.

"I grew up and we were girls together. We embroidered, and I drew, and
sometimes we had little treats and good times, and my father did not
come often, and we got along the best we could. Always it was worse
on her, because she was not so strong as I, and her heart was secretly
breaking for her mother, and she was afraid he would come back any
hour. She was tortured that she could not educate me more than to put
me through the high school. She wore herself out doing that, but she was
wild for me to be reared and trained right. So every day she crouched
over delicate laces and embroidery, and before and after school I
carried it and got more, and in vacation we worked together. But living
grew higher, and she became ill, and could not work, and I hadn't her
skill, and the drawings didn't bring much, and I'd no tools----"

"Ruth, for mercy sake let me take you in my arms. If you've got to tell
this to find peace, let me hold you while you do it."

"Never again," said the Girl. "You won't want to in a minute. You must
hear this, because I can't bear it any longer, and it isn't fair to let
you grieve and think me worth loving. Anyway, I couldn't earn what she
did, and I was afraid, for a great city is heartless to the poor. One
morning she fainted and couldn't get up. I can see the awful look in her
eyes now. She knew what was coming. I didn't. I tried to be brave and
to work. Oh it's no use to go on with that! It was just worse and worse.
She was lovely and delicate, she was my mother, and I adored her. Oh
Man! You won't judge harshly?"

"No!" cried the Harvester, "I won't judge at all, Ruth. I see now. Get
it over if you must tell me."

"One day she had been dreadfully ill for a long time and there was no
food or work or money, and the last scrap was pawned, and she simply
would not let me notify the charities or tell me who or where her people
were. She said she had sinned against them and broken their hearts,
and probably they were dead, and I was desperate. I walked all day from
house to house where I had delivered work, but it was no use; no one
wanted anything I could do, and I went back frantic, and found her
gnawing her fingers and gibbering in delirium. She did not know me, and
for the first time she implored me for food.

"Then I locked the door and went on the street and I asked a woman. She
laughed and said she'd report me and I'd be locked up for begging.
Then I saw a man I passed sometimes. I thought he lived close. I went
straight to him, and told him my mother was very ill, and asked him
to help her. He told me to go to the proper authorities. I told him I
didn't know who they were or where, and I had no money and she was a
woman of refinement, and never would forgive me. I offered, if he would
come to see her, get her some beef tea, and take care of her while she
lived, that afterward----"

The Girl's frail form shook in a storm of sobs. At last she lifted her
eyes to the Harvester's. "There must be a God, and somewhere at the
last extremity He must come in. The man went with me, and he was a young
doctor who had an office a few blocks away, and he knew what to do. He
hadn't much himself, but for several weeks he divided and she was more
comfortable and not hungry when she went. When it was over I dressed
her the best I could in my graduation dress, and folded her hands, and
kissed her good-bye, and told him I was ready to fulfill my offer; and
oh Man!----He said he had forgotten!"

"God!" panted the Harvester.

"We couldn't bury her there. But I remembered my father had said he had
a brother in the country, and once he had been to see us when I was very
little, and the doctor telegraphed him, and he answered that his wife
was sick, and if I was able to work I could come, and he would bury her,
and give me a home. The doctor borrowed the money and bought the coffin
you found her in. He couldn't do better or he would, for he learned to
love her. He paid our fares and took us to the train. Before I started
I went on my knees to him and worshipped him as the Almighty, and I am
sure I told him that I always would be indebted to him, and any time he
required I would pay. The rest you know."

"Have you heard from him, Ruth?"

"No."

"It WAS yourself the other day on the bridge?"

"Yes."

"Did he love you?"

"Not that I know of. No! Nobody but you would love a girl who appeared
as I did then."

The Harvester strove to keep a set face, but his lips drew back from his
teeth.

"Ruth, do you love him?"

"Love!" cried the Girl. "A pale, expressionless word! Adore would come
closer! I tell you she was delirious with hunger, and he fed her. She
was suffering horrors and he eased the pain. She was lifeless, and
he kept her poor tired body from the dissecting table. I would have
fulfilled my offer, and gone straight into the lake, but he spared me,
Man! He spared me! Worship is a good word. I think I worship him. I
tried to tell you. Before you got that license, I wanted you to know."

"I remember," said the Harvester. "But no man could have guessed that a
girl with your face had agony like that in her heart, not even when he
read deep trouble there."

"I should have told you then! I should have forced you to hear! I was
wild with fear of Uncle Henry, and I had nowhere to go. Now you know! Go
away, and the end will come soon."

The Harvester arose and walked a few steps toward the lake, where he
paused stricken, but fighting for control. For him the light had gone
out. There was nothing beyond. The one passion of his life must live on,
satisfied with a touch from lips that loved another man. Broken sobbing
came to him. He did not even have time to suffer. Stumblingly he turned
and going to the Girl he picked her up, and sat on the bench holding her
closely.

"Stop it, Ruth!" he said unsteadily. "Stop this! Why should you suffer
so? I simply will not have it. I will save you against yourself and the
world. You shall have all happiness yet; I swear it, my girl! You are
all right. He was a noble man, and he spared you because he loved you,
of course. I will make you well and rosy again, and then I will go and
find him, and arrange everything for you. I have spared you, too, and if
he doesn't want you to remain here with me, Mrs. Carey would be glad
to have you until I can free you. Judges are human. It will be a simple
matter. Hush, Ruth, listen to me! You shall be free! At once, if you
say so! You shall have him! I will go and bring him here, and I will go
away. Ruth, darling, stop crying and hear me. You will grow better, now
that you have told me. It is this secret that has made you feverish
and kept you ill. Ruth, you shall have happiness yet, if I have got to
circle the globe and scale the walls of Heaven to find it for you."

She struggled from his arms and ran toward the lake. When the Harvester
caught her, she screamed wildly, and struck him with her thin white
hands. He lifted and carried her to the laboratory, where he gave her a
few drops from a bottle and soon she became quiet. Then he took her to
the sunshine room, laid her on the bed, locked the screens and her door,
called Belshazzar to watch, and ran to the stable. A few minutes later
with distended nostrils and indignant heart Betsy, under the flail of an
unsparing lash, pounded down the hill toward Onabasha.



CHAPTER XVII. LOVE INVADES SCIENCE

The Harvester placed the key in the door and turned to Doctor Carey and
the nurse.

"I drugged her into unconsciousness before I left, but she may have
returned, at least partially. Miss Barnet, will you kindly see if she
is ready for the doctor? You needn't be in the least afraid. She has no
strength, even in delirium."

He opened the door, his head averted, and the nurse hurried into the
room. The Girl on the bed was beginning to toss, moan, and mutter.
Skilful hands straightened her, arranged the covers, and the doctor was
called. In the living-room the Harvester paced in misery too deep for
consecutive thought. As consciousness returned, the Girl grew wilder,
and the nurse could not follow the doctor's directions and care for her.
Then Doctor Carey called the Harvester. He went in and sitting beside
the bed took the feverish, wildly beating hands in his strong, cool
ones, and began stroking them and talking.

"Easy, honey," he murmured softly. "Lie quietly while I tell you. You
mustn't tire yourself. You are wasting strength you need to fight the
fever. I'll hold your hands tight, I'll stroke your head for you. Lie
quietly, dear, and Doctor Carey and his head nurse are going to make you
well in a little while. That's right! Let me do the moving; you lie and
rest. Only rest and rest, until all the pain is gone, and the strong
days come, and they are going to bring great joy, love, and peace, to my
dear, dear girl. Even the moans take strength. Try just to lie quietly
and rest. You can't hear Singing Water if you don't listen, Ruth."

"She doesn't realize that it is you or know what you say, David," said
Doctor Carey gently.

"I understand," said the Harvester. "But if you will observe, you will
see that she is quiet when I stroke her head and hands, and if you
notice closely you will grant that she gets a word occasionally. If it
is the right one, it helps. She knows my voice and touch, and she is
less nervous and afraid with me. Watch a minute!"

The Harvester took both of the Girl's fluttering hands in one of his
and with long, light strokes gently brushed them, and then her head, and
face, and then her hands again, and in a low, monotonous, half sing-song
voice he crooned, "Rest, Ruth, rest! It is night now. The moon is
bridging Loon Lake, and the whip-poor-will is crying. Listen, dear,
don't you hear him crying? Still, Girl, still! Just as quiet! Lie so
quietly. The whip-poor-will is going to tell his mate he loves her,
loves her so dearly. He is going to tell her, when you listen. That's a
dear girl. Now he is beginning. He says, 'Come over the lake and listen
to the song I'm singing to you, my mate, my mate, my dear, dear mate,'
and the big night moths are flying; and the katydids are crying,
positive and sure they are crying, a thing that's past denying. Hear
them crying? And the ducks are cheeping, soft little murmurs while
they're sleeping, sleeping. Resting, softly resting! Gently, Girl,
gently! Down the hill comes Singing Water, laughing, laughing! Don't you
hear it laughing? Listen to the big owl courting; it sees the <DW53> out
hunting, it hears the mink softly slipping, slipping, where the dews of
night are dripping. And the little birds are sleeping, so still they
are sleeping. Girls should be a-sleeping, like the birds a-sleeping,
for to-morrow joy comes creeping, joy and life and love come creeping,
creeping to my Girl. Gently, gently, that's a dear girl, gently! Tired
hands rest easy, tired head lies still! That's the way to rest----"

On and on the even voice kept up the story. All over and around the
lake, the length of Singing Water, the marsh folk found voices to tell
of their lives, where it was a story of joy, rest, and love. Up the hill
ranged the Harvester, through the forest where the squirrels slept, the
owl hunted, the fire-flies flickered, the fairies squeezed flower leaves
to make colour to paint the autumn foliage, and danced on toadstool
platforms. Just so long as his voice murmured and his touch continued,
so long the Girl lay quietly, and the medicines could act. But no other
touch would serve, and no other voice would answer. If the harvester
left the room five minutes to show the nurse how to light the fire, and
where to find things, he returned to tossing, restless delirium.

"It's magic David," said Doctor Carey. "Magic!"

"It is love," said the Harvester. "Even crazed with fever, she
recognizes its voice and touch. You've got your work cut out, Doc. Roll
your sleeves and collect your wits. Set your heart on winning. There is
one thing shall not happen. Get that straight in your mind, right
now. And you too, Miss Barnet! There is nothing like fighting for a
certainty. You may think the Girl is desperately ill, and she is, but
make up your minds that you are here to fight for her life, and to save
it. Save, do you understand? If she is to go, I don't need either of
you. I can let her do that myself. You are here on a mission of life.
Keep it before you! Life and health for this Girl is the prize you are
going to win. Dig into it, and I'll pay the bills, and extra besides. If
money is any incentive, I'll give you all I've got for life and health
for the Girl. Are you doing all you know?"

"I certainly am, David."

"But when day comes you'll have to go back to the hospital and we may
not know how to meet crises that will arise. What then? We should have a
competent physician in the house until this fever breaks."

"I had thought of that, David. I will arrange to send one of the men
from the hospital who will be able to watch symptoms and come for me
when needed."

"Won't do!" said the Harvester calmly. "She has no strength for waiting.
You are to come when you can, and remain as long as possible. The case
is yours; your decisions go, but I will select your assistant. I know
the man I want."

"Who is he, David?"

"I'll tell you when I learn whether I can get him. Now I want you to
give the Girl the strongest sedative you dare, take off your coat, roll
your sleeves, and see how well you can imitate my voice, and how much
you have profited by listening to my song. In other words, before day
calls, I want you to take my place so successfully that you deceive her,
and give me time to make a trip to town. There are a few things that
must be done, and I think I can work faster in the night. Will you?"

Doctor Carey bent over the bed. Gently he slipped a practised hand under
the Harvester's and made the next stroke down the white arm. Gradually
he took possession of the thin hands and his touch fell on the masses of
dark hair. As the Harvester arose the doctor took the seat.

"You go on!" he ordered gruffly. "I'll do better alone."

The Harvester stepped back. The doctor's touch was easy and the Girl lay
quietly for an instant, then she moved restlessly.

"You must be still now," he said gently. "The moon is up, the lake is
all white, and the birds are flying all around. Lie still or you'll make
yourself worse. Stiller than that! If you don't you can't hear things
courting. The ducks are quacking, the bull frogs are croaking, and
everything. Lie still, still, I tell you!"

"Oh good Lord, Doc!" groaned the Harvester in desperation.

The Girl wrenched her hands free and her head rolled on the pillow.

"Harvester! Harvester!" she cried.

The doctor started to arise.

"Sit still!" commanded the Harvester. "Take her hands and go to work,
idiot! Give her more sedative, and tell her I'm coming. That's the word,
if she realizes enough to call for me."

The doctor possessed himself of the flying hands, and gently held and
stroked them.

"The Harvester is coming," he said. "Wait just a minute, he's on the
way. He is coming. I think I hear him. He will be here soon, very soon
now. That's a good girl! Lie still for David. He won't like it if you
toss and moan. Just as still, lie still so I can listen. I can't tell
whether he is coming until you are quiet."

Then he said to the Harvester, "You see, I've got it now. I can manage
her, but for pity sake, hurry man! Take the car! Jim is asleep on the
back seat----Yes, yes, Girl! I'm listening for him. I think I hear him!
I think he's coming!"

Here and there a word penetrated, and she lay more quietly, but not in
the rest to which the Harvester had lulled her.

"Hurry man!" groaned the doctor in a whispered aside, and the Harvester
ran to the car, awakened the driver and told him he had a clear road to
Onabasha, to speed up.

"Where to?" asked the driver.

"Dickson, of the First National."

In a few minutes the car stopped before the residence and the Harvester
made an attack on the front door. Presently the man came.

"Excuse me for routing you out at this time of night," said the
Harvester, "but it's a case of necessity. I have an automobile here.
I want you to go to the bank with me, and get me an address from your
draft records. I know the rules, but I want the name of my wife's
Chicago physician. She is delirious, and I must telephone him."

The cashier stepped out and closed the door.

"Nine chances out of ten it will be in the vault," he said.

"That leaves one that it won't," answered the Harvester. "Sometimes I've
looked in when passing in the night, and I've noticed that the books are
not always put away. I could see some on the rack to-night. I think it
is there."

It was there, and the Harvester ordered the driver to hurry him to the
telephone exchange, then take the cashier home and return and wait. He
called the Chicago Information office.

"I want Dr. Frank Harmon, whose office address is 1509 Columbia Street.
I don't know the 'phone number."

Then came a long wait, and after twenty minutes the blessed buzzing
whisper, "Here's your party."

"Doctor Harmon?"

"Yes."

"You remember Ruth Jameson, the daughter of a recent patient of yours?"

"I do."

"Well my name is Langston. The Girl is in my home and care. She is very
ill with fever, and she has much confidence in you. This is Onabasha,
on the Grand Rapids and Indiana. You take the Pennsylvania at seven
o'clock, telegraph ahead that you are coming so that they will make
connection for you, change at twelve-twenty at Fort Wayne, and I will
meet you here. You will find your ticket and a check waiting you at the
Chicago depot. Arrange to remain a week at least. You will be paid all
expenses and regular prices for your time. Will you come?"

"Yes."

"All right. Make no failure. Good-bye."

Then the Harvester left an order with the telephone company to run a
wire to Medicine Woods the first thing in the morning, and drove to the
depot to arrange for the ticket and check. In less than an hour he was
holding the Girl's hands and crooning over her.

"Jerusalem!" said Doctor Carey, rising stiffly. "I'd rather undertake
to cut off your head and put it back on than to tackle another job like
that. She's quite delirious, but she has flashes, and at such times she
knows whom she wants; the rest of the time it's a jumble and some of it
is rather gruesome. She's seen dreadful illness, hunger, and there's a
debt she's wild about. I told you something was back of this. You've got
to find out and set her mind at ease."

"I know all about it," said the Harvester patiently between crooning
sentences to the Girl. "But the crash came before I could convince her
that it was all right and I could fix everything for her easily. If she
only could understand me!"

"Did you find your man?"

"Yes. He will be here this afternoon."

"Quick work!"

"This takes quick work."

"Do you know anything about him?"

"Yes. He is a young fellow, just starting out. He is a fine, straight,
manly man. I don't know how much he knows, but it will be enough to
recognize your ability and standing, and to do what you tell him. I have
perfect confidence in him. I want you to come back at one, and take my
place until I go to meet him."

"I can bring him out."

"I have to see him myself. There are a few words to be said before he
sees the Girl."

"David, what are you up to?"

"Being as honourable as I can. No man gets any too decent, but there is
no law against doing as you would be done by, and being as straight as
you know how. When I've talked to him, I'll know where I am and I'll
have something to say to you."

"David, I'm afraid----"

"Then what do you suppose I am?" said the Harvester. "It's no use, Doc.
Be still and take what comes! The manner in which you meet a crisis
proves you a whining cur or a man. I have got lots of respect for a dog,
as a dog; but I've none for a man as a dog. If you've gathered from the
Girl's delirium that I've made a mistake, I hope you have confidence
enough in me to believe I'll right it, and take my punishment without
whining. Go away, you make her worse. Easy, Girl, the world is all right
and every one is sleeping now, so you should be at rest. With the day
the doctor will come, the good doctor you know and like, Ruth. You
haven't forgotten your doctor, Ruth? The kind doctor who cared for you.
He will make you well, Ruth; well and oh, so happy! Harmon, Harmon,
Doctor Harmon is coming to you, Girl, and then you will be so happy!"

"Why you blame idiot!" cried Doctor Carey in a harsh whisper. "Have you
lost all the sense you ever had? Stop that gibber! She wants to hear
about the birds and Singing Water. Go on with that woods line of talk;
she likes that away the best. This stuff is making her restless. See!"

"You mean you are," said the Harvester wearily. "Please leave us alone.
I know the words that will bring comfort. You don't."

He began the story all over again, but now there ran through it a
continual refrain. "Your doctor is coming, the good doctor you know. He
will make you well and strong, and he will make life so lovely for you."

He was talking without pause or rest when Doctor Carey returned in the
afternoon to take his place. He brought Mrs. Carey with him, and she
tried a woman's powers of soothing another woman, and almost drove the
Girl to fighting frenzy. So the doctor made another attempt, and the
Harvester raced down the hill to the city. He went to the car shed as
the train pulled in, and stood at one side while the people hurried
through the gate. He was watching for a young man with a travelling bag
and perhaps a physician's satchel, who would be looking for some one.

"I think I'll know him," muttered the Harvester grimly. "I think the
masculine element in me will pop up strongly and instinctively at the
sight of this man who will take my Dream Girl from me. Oh good God! Are
You sure You ARE good?"

In his brown khaki trousers and shirt, his head bare, his bronze face
limned with agony he made no attempt to conceal, the Harvester, with
feet planted firmly, and tightly folded arms, his head tipped slightly
to one side, braced himself as he sent his keen gray eyes searching the
crowd. Far away he selected his man. He was young, strong, criminally
handsome, clean and alert; there was discernible anxiety on his face,
and it touched the Harvester's soul that he was coming just as swiftly
as he could force his way. As he passed the gates the Harvester reached
his side.

"Doctor Harmon, I think," he said.

"Yes."

"This way! If you have luggage, I will send for it later."

The Harvester hurried to the car.

"Take the shortest cut and cover space," he said to the driver. The car
kept to the speed limit until toward the suburbs.

Doctor Harmon removed his hat, ran his fingers through dark waving hair
and yielded his body to the swing of the car. Neither man attempted to
talk. Once the Harvester leaned forward and told the driver to stop
on the bridge, and then sat silently. As the car slowed down, they
alighted.

"Drive on and tell Doc we are here, and will be up soon," said the
Harvester. Then he turned to the stranger. "Doctor Harmon, there's
little time for words. This is my place, and here I grow herbs for
medicinal houses."

"I have heard of you, and heard your stuff recommended," said the
doctor.

"Good!" exclaimed the Harvester. "That saves time. I stopped here to
make a required explanation to you. The day you sent Ruth Jameson to
Onabasha, I saw her leave the train and recognized in her my ideal
woman. I lost her in the crowd and it took some time to locate her.
I found her about a month ago. She was miserable. If you saw what her
father did to her and her mother in Chicago, you should have seen what
his brother was doing here. The end came one day in my presence, when I
paid her for ginseng she had found to settle her debt to you. He robbed
her by force. I took the money from him, and he threatened her. She was
ill then from heat, overwork, wrong food----every misery you can imagine
heaped upon the dreadful conditions in which she came. It had been my
intention to court and marry her if I possibly could. That day she had
nowhere to go; she was wild with fear; the fever that is scorching her
now was in her veins then. I did an insane thing. I begged her to marry
me at once and come here for rest and protection. I swore that if she
would, she should not be my wife, but my honoured guest, until she
learned to love me and released me from my vow. She tried to tell
me something; I had no idea it was anything that would make any real
difference, and I wouldn't listen. Last night, when the fever was
beginning to do its worst, she told me of your entrance into her life
and what it meant to her. Then I saw that I had made a mistake. You were
her choice, the man she could love, not me, so I took the liberty of
sending for you. I want you to cure her, court her, marry her, and make
her happy. God knows she has had her share of suffering. You recognize
her as a girl of refinement?"

"I do."

"You grant that in health she would be lovelier than most women, do you
not?"

"She was more beautiful than most in sickness and distress."

"Good!" cried the Harvester. "She has been here two weeks. I give you my
word, my promise to her has been kept faithfully. As soon as I can leave
her to attend to it, she shall have her freedom. That will be easy. Will
you marry her?"

The doctor hesitated.

"What is it?" asked the Harvester.

"Well to be frank," said Doctor Harmon, "it is money! I'm only getting a
start. I borrowed funds for my schooling and what I used for her. She is
in every way attractive enough to be desired by any man, but how am I to
provide a home and support her and pay these debts? I'll try it, but I
am afraid it will be taking her back to wrong conditions again."

"If you knew that she owned a comfortable cottage in the suburbs, where
it is cool and clean, and had, say a hundred a month of her own for the
coming three years, could you see your way?"

"That would make all the difference in the world. I thought seriously of
writing her. I wanted to, but I concluded I'd better work as hard as I
could for some practice first, and see if I could make a living for
two, before I tried to start anything. I had no idea she would not be
comfortably cared for at her uncle's."

"I see," said the Harvester. "If I had kept out, life would have come
right for her."

"On the contrary," said the doctor, "it appears very probable that she
would not be living."

"It is understood between us, then, that you will court and marry her so
soon as she is strong enough?"

"It is understood," agreed the doctor.

"Will you honour me by taking my hand?" asked the Harvester. "I scarcely
had hoped to find so much of a man. Now come to your room and get ready
for the stiffest piece of work you ever attempted."

The Harvester led the way to the guest chamber over looking the lake,
and installed its first occupant. Then he hurried to the Girl. The
doctor was holding her head and one hand, his wife the other, and the
nurse her feet. It took the Harvester ten strenuous minutes to make his
touch and presence known and to work quiet. All over he began crooning
his story of rest, joy, and love. He broke off with a few words to
introduce Doctor Harmon to the Careys and the nurse, and then calmly
continued while the other men stood and watched him.

"Seems rather cut out for it," commented Doctor Harmon.

"I never yet have seen him attempt anything that he didn't appear cut
out for," answered Doctor Carey.

"Will she know me?" inquired the young man, approaching the bed.

When the Girl's eyes fell on him she grew rigid and lay staring at him.
Suddenly with a wild cry she struggled to rise.

"You have come!" she cried. "Oh I knew you would come! I felt you would
come! I cannot pay you now! Oh why didn't you come sooner?"

The young doctor leaned over and took one of the white hands from the
Harvester, stroking it gently.

"Why you did pay, Ruth! How did you come to forget? Don't you remember
the draft you sent me? I didn't come for money; I came to visit you, to
nurse you, to do all I can to make you well. I am going to take care of
you now so finely you'll be out on the lake and among the flowers soon.
I've got some medicine that makes every one well. It's going to make you
strong, and there's something else that's going to make you happy; and
me, I'm going to be the proudest man alive."

He reached over and took possession of the other hand, stroking them
softly, and the Girl lay tensely staring at him and gradually yielding
to his touch and voice. The Harvester arose, and passing around the bed,
he placed a chair for Doctor Harmon and motioning for Doctor Carey left
the room. He went to the shore to his swimming pool, wearily dropped on
the bench, and stared across the water.

"Well thank God it worked, anyway!" he muttered.

"What's that popinjay doing here?" thundered Doctor Carey. "Got some
medicine that cures everybody. Going to make her well, is he? Make the
cows, and the ducks, and the chickens, and the shitepokes well, and
happy----no name for it! After this we are all going to be well and
happy! You look it right now, David! What under Heaven have you done?"

"Left my wife with the man she loves, and to whom I release her, my dear
friend," said the Harvester. "And it's so easy for me that you needn't
give making it a little harder, any thought."

"David, forgive me!" cried Doctor Carey. "I don't understand this. I'm
almost insane. Will you tell me what it means?"

"Means that I took advantage of the Girl's illness, utter loneliness,
and fear, and forced her into marrying me for shelter and care, when she
loved and wanted another man, who was preparing to come to her. He is
her Chicago doctor, and fine in every fibre, as you can see. There is
only one thing on earth for me to do, and that is to get out of their
way, and I'll do it as soon as she is well; but I vow I won't leave her
poor, tired body until she is, not even for him. I thought sure I could
teach her to love me! Oh but this is bitter, Doc!"

"You are a consummate fool to bring him here!" cried Doctor Carey. "If
she is too sick to realize the situation now, she will be different when
she is normal again. Any sane girl that wouldn't love you, David, ain't
fit for anything!"

"Yes, I'm a whale of a lover!" said the Harvester grimly. "Nice mess
I've made of it. But there is no real harm done. Thank God, Harmon was
not the only white man."

"David, what do you mean?"

"Is it between us, Doc?"

"Yes."

"For all time?"

"It is."

The Harvester told him. He ended, "Give the fellow his dues, Doc. He had
her at his mercy, utterly alone and unprotected, in a big city. There
was not a living soul to hold him to account. He added to his burdens,
borrowed more money, and sent her here. He thought she was coming to
the country where she would be safe and well cared for until he could
support her. I did the remainder. Now I must undo it, that's all! But
you have got to go in there and practise with him. You've got to show
him every courtesy of the profession. You must go a little over the
rules, and teach him all you can. You will have to stifle your feelings,
and be as much of a man as it is in you to be, at your level best."

"I'm no good at stifling my feelings!"

"Then you'll have to learn," said the Harvester. "If you'd lived through
my years of repression in the woods you'd do the fellow credit. As I see
it, his side of this is nearly as fine as you make it. I tell you she
was utterly stricken, alone, and beautiful. She sought his assistance.
When the end came he thought only of her. Won't you give a young fellow
in a place like Chicago some credit for that? Can't you get through you
what it means?"

Doctor Carey stood frowning in deep thought, but the lines of his face
gradually changed.

"I suppose I've got to stomach him," he said.

The nurse came down the gravel path.

"Mr. Langston, Doctor Harmon asked me to call you," she said.

The Harvester arose and went to the sunshine room.

"What does he want, Molly?" asked the doctor.

"Wants to turn over his job," chuckled the nurse. "He held it about
seven minutes in peace, and then she began to fret and call for the
Harvester. He just sweat blood to pacify her, but he couldn't make it.
He tried to hold her, to make love to her, and goodness knows what, but
she struggled and cried, 'David,' until he had to give it up and send
me."

"Molly," said Doctor Carey, "we've known the Harvester a long time, and
he is our friend, isn't he?"

"Of course!" said the nurse.

"We know this is the first woman he ever loved, probably ever will, as
he is made. Now we don't like this stranger butting in here; we resent
it, Molly. We are on the side of our friend, and we want him to win.
I'll grant that this fellow is fine, and that he has done well, but
what's the use in tearing up arrangements already made? And so suitable!
Now Molly, you are my best nurse, and a good reliable aid in times like
this. I gave you instructions an hour ago. I'll add this to them. YOU
ARE ON THE HARVESTER'S SIDE. Do you understand? In this, and the days to
come, you'll have a thousand chances to put in a lick with a sick woman.
Put them in as I tell you."

"Yes, Doctor Carey."

"And Molly! You are something besides my best nurse. You're a smashing
pretty girl, and your occupation should make you especially attractive
to a young doctor. I'm sure this fellow is all right, so while you are
doing your best with your patient for the Harvester, why not have a
try for yourself with the doctor? It couldn't do any harm, and it might
straighten out matters. Anyway, you think it over."

The nurse studied his face silently for a time, and then she began to
laugh softly.

"He is up there doing his best with her," she said.

The doctor threw out his hands in a gesture of disdain, and the nurse
laughed again; but her cheeks were pink and her eyes flashing as she
returned to duty.

"Random shot, but it might hit something, you never can tell," commented
the doctor.

The Harvester entered the Girl's room and stood still. She was fretting
and raising her temperature rapidly. Before he reached the door his
heart gave one great leap at the sound of her voice calling his name. He
knew what to do, but he hesitated.

"She seems to have become accustomed to you, and at times does not
remember me," said Doctor Harmon. "I think you had better take her again
until she grows quiet."

The Harvester stepped to the bed and looked the doctor in the eye.

"I am afraid I left out one important feature in our little talk on the
bridge," he said. "I neglected to tell you that in your fight for this
woman's life and love you have a rival. I am he. She is my wife, and
with the last fibre of my being I adore her. If you win, and she wants
you to take her away, I will help you; but my heart goes with her
forever. If by any chance it should occur that I have been mistaken or
misinterpreted her delirium or that she has been deceived and finds
she prefers me and Medicine Woods, to you and Chicago, when she has had
opportunity to measure us man against man, you must understand that
I claim her. So I say to you frankly, take her if you can, but don't
imagine that I am passive. I'll help you if I know she wants you, but I
fight you every inch of the way. Only it has got to be square and open.
Do you understand?"

"You are certainly sufficiently clear."

"No man who is half a man sees the last chance of happiness go out of
his life without putting up the stiffest battle he knows," said the
Harvester grimly. "Ruth-girl, you are raising the fever again. You must
be quiet."

With infinite tenderness he possessed himself of her hands and began
stroking her hair, and in a low and soothing voice the story of the
birds, flowers, lake, and woods went on. To keep it from growing
monotonous the Harvester branched out and put in everything he knew.
In the days that followed he held a position none could take from him.
While the doctors fought the fever, he worked for rest and quiet, and
soothed the tortured body as best he could, that the medicines might
act.

But the fever was stubborn, and the remedies were slow; and long before
the dreaded coming day the doctors and nurse were quietly saying to
each other that when the crisis came the heart would fail. There was no
vitality to sustain life. But they did not dare tell the Harvester.
Day and night he sat beside the maple bed or stretched sleeping a
few minutes on the couch while the Girl slept; and with faith never
faltering and courage unequalled, he warned them to have their remedies
and appliances ready.

"I don't say it's going to be easy," he said. "I just merely state that
it must be done. And I'll also mention that, when the hour comes, the
man who discovers that he could do something if he had digitalis, or a
remedy he should have had ready and has forgotten, that man had better
keep out of my sight. Make your preparations now. Talk the case over.
Fill your hypodermics. Clean your air pumps. Get your hot-water bottles
ready. Have system. Label your stuff large and set it conveniently. You
see what is coming, be prepared!"

One day, while the Girl lay in a half-drugged, feverish sleep, the
Harvester went for a swim. He dressed a little sooner than was expected
and in crossing the living-room he heard Doctor Harmon say to Doctor
Carey on the veranda, "What are we going to do with him when the end
comes?"

The Harvester stepped to the door. "That won't be the question," he said
grimly. "It will be what will HE do with us?"

Then, with an almost imperceptible movement, he caught Doctor Harmon at
the waist line, and lifted and dangled him as a baby, and then stood
him on the floor. "Didn't hardly expect that much muscle, did you?" he
inquired lightly. "And I'm not in what you could call condition, either.
Instead of wasting any time on fool questions like that, you two go over
your stuff and ask each other, have we got every last appliance known
to physics and surgery? Have we got duplicates on hand in case we break
delicate instruments like hypodermic syringes and that sort of thing?
Engage yourselves with questions pertaining to life; that is your
business. Instead of planning what you'll do in failure, bolster your
souls against it. Granny Moreland beats you two put together in grip and
courage."

The Harvester returned to his task, and the fight went on. At last the
hour came when the temperature fell lower and lower. The feeble pulses
flickered and grew indiscernible; a gray pallor hovered over the Girl,
and a cold sweat stood on her temples.

"Now!" said the Harvester. "Exercise your calling! Fight like men or
devils, but win you must."

They did work. They administered stimulants; applied heat to the chilled
body; fans swept the room with vitalized air; hypodermics were used; and
every last resort known to science was given a full test, and the weak
heart throbbed slower and slower, and life ran out with each breath. The
Harvester stood waiting with set jaws. He could detect no change for the
better. At last he picked up a chilled hand and could discover no
pulse, and the gray nails and the dark tips told a story of arrested
circulation. He laid down the hand and faced the men.

"This is what you'd call the crisis, Doc?" he asked gently.

"Yes."

"Are you stemming it? Are you stemming it? Are you sure she is holding
her own?"

Doctor Carey looked at him silently.

"Have you done all you can do?" asked the Harvester.

"Yes."

"You believe her going out?"

"Yes."

The Harvester turned to Doctor Harmon. "Do you concur in that?"

"Yes."

Then to the nurse, "And you?"

"Yes."

"Then," said the Harvester, "all of you are useless. Get out of here. I
don't want your atmosphere. If you can believe only in death, leave us!
She is my wife, and if this is the end she belongs to me, and I will do
as I choose with her. All of you go!"

The Harvester stepped to the bathroom door and called Granny Moreland.
"Granny," he said, "science has turned tail, and left me in extremity.
Fill your hot-water bottles and come in here with your heart big with
hope and help me save my Dream Girl. She is breathing Granny; we've got
to make her keep it up, that's all----just keep her breathing."

He returned to the sunshine room, placed a small table beside the bed,
and on it a glass of water, spoon, and a hypodermic syringe. When Granny
Moreland came he said: "Now you begin on her feet and rub with long,
sweeping, upward strokes to drive the blood to her heart."

Around the Girl he piled hot-water bottles and breathlessly hung over
her, rubbing her hands. He wiped the perspiration from her forehead, and
then dropped by her bed and for a second laid his face on her cold palm.

"If I am wrong, Heaven forgive me," he prayed. "And you, oh, my darling
Dream Girl, forgive me, but I am forced to try----God helping me! Amen."

He arose, took a small bottle from his pocket, filled the spoon with
water, and measured into it three drops of liquid as yellow as gold.
Then he held the spoon to the blue lips, and with his fingers worked
apart the set teeth, and poured the medicine down her throat. Then they
rubbed and muttered snatches of prayer for fifteen minutes when the
Harvester administered another three drops. It might have been fancy,
but it seemed to him her jaws were not so stiff. Faster flew his hands
and he sent Granny Moreland to refill the hot bottles. When he gave the
Girl the third dose he injected some of the liquid over her heart and of
the glycerine the doctors had left, in the extremities. He released more
air and began rubbing again.

The second hour started in the same way, and ended with slowly relaxing
muscles and faint tinges of colour in the white cheeks. The feet were
not so cold, and when the Harvester held the spoon he knew that the
Girl made an effort to swallow, and he could see her eyelids tremble.
Thereupon he pointed these signs to Granny, and implored her to rub and
pray, and pray and rub, while he worked until the perspiration rolled
down his gray face. At the end of the second hour he began decreasing
the doses and shortening the time, and again he commenced in a
low rumble his song of life and health, to encourage the Girl as
consciousness returned.

Occasionally Doctor Carey opened the door slightly and peeped in to see
if he were wanted, but he received no invitation to enter. The last
time he left with the impression that the Harvester was raving, while
he worked over a lifeless body. He had the Girl warmly covered and bent
over her face and hands. At her feet crouched Granny Moreland, rubbing,
still rubbing, beneath the covers, while in a steady stream the
Harvester was pouring out his song. If he had listened an instant longer
he would have recognized that the tone and the words had changed. Now it
was, "Gently, breathe gently, Girl! Slowly, steadily, easily! Deeper, a
little deeper, Ruth! Brave Girl, never another so wonderful! That's my
Dream Girl coming from the shadows, coming to life's sunshine, coming to
hope, coming to love! Deeper, just a little deeper! Smoothly and evenly!
You are making it, Girl! You are making it! By all that is holy and
glorious! Stick to it, Ruth, hold tight to me! I'll help you, dear! You
are coming, coming back to life and love. Don't worry yourself trying
too hard, if only you can send every breath as deeply as the last one,
you can make it. You brave girl! You wonderful Dream Girl! Ah, Ruth, the
name of this is victory!"

An hour before Doctor Carey had said to Doctor Harmon and the nurse,
as he softly closed the door: "It is over and the Harvester is raving.
We'll give him a little more time and see if he won't realize it
himself. That will be easier for him than for us to try to tell him."

Now he opened the door, stared a second, and coming to the opposite side
of the bed, he leaned over the Girl. Then he felt her feet. They were
warm and slightly damp. A surprised look crept over his face. He gently
reached for a hand that the Harvester yielded to him. It was warm,
the blue tips becoming rosy, the wrist pulse discernible. Then he bent
closer, touched her face, and saw the tremulous eyelids. He turned back
the cover, and held his ear over her heart. When he straightened, "As
God lives, she's got a chance, David!" he exulted in an awed whisper.

The Harvester lifted a graven face, down which the sweat of agony
rolled, and his lips parted in a twitching smile. "Then this is where
love beats the doctors, Carey!" he said.

"It is where love has ventured what science dares not. Love didn't do
all of this. In the name of the Almighty, what did you give her, David?"

"Life!" cried the Harvester. "Life! Come on, Ruth, come on! Out of the
valley come to me! You are well now, Girl! It's all over! The last trace
of fever is gone, the last of the dull ache. Can you swallow just two
more drops of bottled sunshine, Ruth?"

The flickering lids slowly opened, and the big black eyes looked
straight into the Harvester's. He met them steadily, smiling
encouragement.

"Hang on to each breath, dear heart!" he urged. "The fever is gone. The
pain is over! Long life and the love you crave are for you. You've only
to keep breathing a few more hours and the battle is yours. Glorious
Girl! Noble! You are doing finely! Ruth, do you know me?"

Her lips moved.

"Don't try to speak," said the Harvester. "Don't waste breath on a word.
Save the good oxygen to strengthen your tired body. But if you do know
me, maybe you could smile, Ruth!"

She could just smile, and that was all. Feeble, flickering, transient,
but as it crossed the living face the Harvester lifted her hands and
kissed them over and over, back, palm, and finger tips.

"Now just one more drop, honey, and then a long rest. Will you try it
again for me?"

She assented, and the Harvester took the bottle from his pocket, poured
the drop, and held the spoon to willing lips. The big eyes were on him
with a question. Then they fell to the spoon. The Harvester understood.

"Yes, it's mine! It's got sixty years of wonderful life in it, every one
of them full of love and happiness for my dear Dream Girl. Can you take
it, Ruth?"

Her lips parted, the wine of life passed between. She smiled faintly,
and her eyelids dropped shut, but presently they opened again.

"David!"

"My Dream Girl!"

"Harvester?"

"Yes!"

"Medicine Man?"

"Don't, Ruth! Save every breath to help your heart."

"Life?"

"Life it is, Girl!" exulted the Harvester. "Long life! Love! Home! The
man you love! Every happiness that ever came to a girl! Nothing shall be
denied you! Nothing shall be lacking! It's all in your hands now, Ruth.
We've all done everything we can; you must do the remainder. It's your
work to send every breath as deeply as you can. Doc, release another
tank of air. Are her feet warm, Granny? Let the nurse take your place
now. And, honey, go to sleep! I'll keep watch for you. I'll measure
each breath you draw. If they shorten or weaken, I'll wake you for more
medicine. You can trust me! Always you can trust me, Ruth."

The Girl smiled and fell into a light, even slumber. Granny Moreland
stumbled to the couch and rolled on it sobbing with nervous exhaustion.
Doctor Carey called the nurse to take her place. Then he came to the
Harvester's side and whispered, "Let me, David!"

The Harvester looked up with his queer grin, but he made no motion to
arise.

"Won't you trust me, David? I'll watch as if it were my own wife."

"I wouldn't trust any man on earth, for the coming three hours," replied
the Harvester. "If I keep this up that long, she is safe. Go and rest
until I call you."

He again bent over the Girl, one hand on her left wrist, the other over
her heart, his eyes on her lips, watching the depth and strength of her
every breath. Regularly he administered the medicine he was giving her.
Sometimes she took it half asleep; again she gave him a smile that to
the Harvester was the supreme thing of earth or Heaven. Toward the end
of the long vigil, in exhaustion he slipped to the floor, and laid his
head on the side of the bed, and for a second his hand relaxed and he
fell asleep. The Girl awakened as his touch loosened and looking down
she saw his huddled body. A second later the Harvester awoke with a
guilty start to find her fingers twisted in the shock of hair on the top
of his head.

"Poor stranded Girl," he muttered. "She's clinging to me for life, and
you can stake all you are worth she's going to get it!"

Then he gently relaxed her grip, gave her the last dose he felt
necessary, yielded his place to Doctor Carey and staggered up the hill.
As the sun peeped over Medicine Woods he stretched himself between the
two mounds under the oak, and for a few minutes his body was rent with
the awful, torn sobbing of a strong man. Belshazzar nosed the twisting
figure and whined pitifully. A chattering little marsh wren tilted on a
bush and scolded. A blue jay perched above and tried to decide whether
there was cause for an alarm signal. A snake coming from the water to
hunt birds ran close to him, and changing its course, went weaving away
among the mosses. Gradually the pent forces spent themselves, and for
hours the Harvester lay in the deep sleep of exhaustion, and stretched
beside him, Belshazzar guarded with anxious dog eyes.



CHAPTER XVIII. THE BETTER MAN

In the middle of the afternoon the Harvester arose and went into the
lake, ate a hearty dinner, and then took up his watch again. For two
days and nights he kept his place, until he had the Girl out of danger,
and where careful nursing was all that was required to insure life
and health. As he sat beside her the last day, his physical endurance
strained to the breaking point, she laid her hand over his, and looked
long and steadily into his eyes.

"There are so many things I want to know," she said.

The Harvester's firm fingers closed over hers. "Ruth, have you ever been
sorry that you trusted me?"

"Never!" said the Girl instantly.

"Then suppose you keep it up," said he. "Whatever it is that you want
to know, don't use an iota of strength to talk or to think about it now.
Just say to yourself, he loves me well enough to do what is right, and
I know that he will. All you have to do is to be patient until you grow
stronger than you ever have been in your life, and then you shall have
exactly what you want, Ruth. Sleep like a baby for a week or two. Then,
slowly and gradually, we will build up such a constitution for you that
you shall ride, drive, row, swim, dance, play, and have all that your
girlhood has missed in fun and frolic, and all that your womanhood
craves in love and companionship. Happiness has come at last, Ruth. Take
it from me. Everything you crave is yours. The love you want, the home,
and the life. As soon as you are strong enough, you shall know all about
it. Your business is to drink stimulants and sleep now, dear."

"So tired of this bed!"

"It won't be long until you can lie on the couch and the veranda swing
again."

"Glory!" said the Girl. "David, I must have been full of fever for a
long time. I can't remember everything."

"Don't try, I tell you. Life is coming out right for you; that's all you
need know now."

"And for you, David?"

"Whenever things are right for you, they are for me, Ruth."

"Don't you ever think of yourself?"

"Not when I am close you."

"Ah! Then I shall have to grow strong very soon and think of you."

The Harvester's smile was pathetic. He was unspeakably tired again.

"Never mind me!" he said. "Only get well."

"David, was there a little horse?"

"There certainly was and is," said the Harvester.

"You had not named him yet, but in a few days I can lead him to the
window."

"Was there something said about a boat?"

"Two of them."

"Two?"

"Yes. A row boat for you, and a launch that will take you all over the
lake with only the exertion of steering on your part."

"David, I want my pendant and ring. I am so tired of lying here, I want
to play with them."

"Where do you keep them, Ruth?"

"In the willow teapot. I thought no one would look there."

The Harvester laughed and brought the little boxes. He had to open them,
but the Girl put on the ring and asked him if he would not help her with
the pendant. He slipped the thread around her neck and clasped it. With
a sigh of satisfaction she took the ornament in one hand and closed her
eyes. He thought she was falling asleep, but presently she looked at
him.

"You won't allow them to take it from me?"

"Indeed no! There is no reason on earth why you should not have that
thread around your neck if you want it."

"I am going to sleep now. I want two things. May I have them?"

"You may," said the Harvester promptly, "provided they are not to eat."

"No," said the Girl. "I've suffered and made others trouble. I won't
bother you by asking for anything more than is brought me. This is
different. You are completely worn out. Your face frightens me, David,
and white hairs that were not there a few days ago have come along your
temples. I can see them."

"You gave me a mighty serious scare, Ruth."

"I know," said the Girl. "Forgive me. I didn't mean to. I want you to
leave me to Doctor Harmon and the nurse and go sleep a week. Then I
will be ready for the swing, and to hear some more about the trees and
birds."

"I can keep it up if you really need me, but if you don't I am sleepy.
So, if you feel safe, I think I will go."

"Oh I am safe enough," said the Girl. "It isn't that. I'm so lonely.
I've made up my mind not to grieve for mother, but I miss her so now. I
feel so friendless."

"But, honey," said the Harvester, "you mustn't do that! Don't you see
how all of us love you? Here is Granny shutting up her house and living
here, just to be with you. The nurse will do anything you say. Here is
the man you know best, and think so much of, staying in the cabin, and
so happy to give you all his time, and anything else you will have,
dear. And the Careys come every day, and will do their best to comfort
you, and always I am here for you to fall back on."

"Yes, I'm falling right now," said the Girl. "I almost wish I had the
fever again. No one has touched me for days. I feel as if every one was
afraid of me."

The Harvester was puzzled.

"Well, Ruth, I'm doing the best I know," he said. "What is it you want?"

"Nothing!" answered the Girl with slightly dejected inflection. "Say
good-bye to me, and go sleep your week. I'll be very good, and then you
shall take me a drive up the hill when you awaken. Won't that be fine?"

"Say good-bye to me!" She felt a "little lonely!" They all acted as if
they were "afraid" of her. The Harvester indulged in a flashing mental
review and arrived at a decision. He knelt beside the bed, took both
slender, cool hands and covered them with kisses. Then he slid a hand
under the pillow and raised the tired head.

"If I am to say good-bye, I have to do it in my own way, Ruth," he said.

Thereupon he began at the tumbled mass of hair and kissed from her
forehead to her lips, kisses warm and tender.

"Now you go to sleep, and grow strong enough by the time I come back to
tell me whom you love," he said, and went from the room without waiting
for any reply.

With short intervals for food and dips in the lake the Harvester very
nearly slept the week. When he finally felt himself again, he bathed,
shaved, dressed freshly, and went to see the Girl. He had to touch her
to be sure she was real. She was extremely weak and tremulous, but her
face and hands were fuller, her colour was good, she was ravenously
hungry. Doctor Harmon said she was a little tryant, and the nurse that
she was plain cross. The first thing the Harvester noticed was that the
dull blue look in the depth of the dark eyes was gone. They were clear,
dusky wells, with shining lights at the bottom.

"Well I never would have believed it!" he cried. "Doctor Harmon, you
are a great physician! You have made her all over new, and in a few more
days she will be on the veranda. This is great!"

"Do I appear so much better to you, Harvester?" asked the Girl.

"Has no one thought to show you," cried the Harvester. "Here, let me!"

He stepped to her dressing table, picked up a mirror, and held it before
her so that she could see herself.

"Seems to me I am dreadfully white and thin yet!"

"If you had seen what I saw ten days ago, my Girl, you would think you
appear like a pink, rosy angel now, or a wonderful dream."

"Truly, do I in the least resemble a dream, David?"

"You are a dream. The loveliest one a man ever had. With three months of
right care and exercise you'll be the beautiful woman nature intended.
I'm so proud of you. You are being so brave! Just lie there in patience
a few more days, and out you come again to life; and life that will
thrill your being with joy."

"All right," said the Girl, "I will. David are you attending to your
herbs?"

"Not for a few weeks."

"You are very much behind?"

"No. Nothing important. I don't make enough to count on what is ready
now. I can soon gather jimson leaves and seed to fill orders, the
hemlock is about right to take the fruit, the mustard is yet in pod, and
the saffron and wormseed can be attended later. I can catch up in two
days."

"What about----about the big bed on the hill?"

The Harvester experienced an inward thrill of delight. She was so
impressed with the value of the ginseng she would not mention it,
even before the man she loved----no more than that----"adored"----
"worshipped!" He smiled at her in understanding.

"I'll have to take a peep at that and report," he said.

"Are you rested now?"

"Indeed yes!"

"You are dreadfully thin."

"I always am. I'll pick up a little when I get back to work."

"David, I want you to go to work now."

"Can you spare me?"

"Haven't we done well these last few days?"

"I can't tell you how well."

"Then please go gather everything you need to fill orders except the big
bed, and by that time maybe you could take another week off, and I could
go to the hill top and on the lake. I'm so anxious to put my feet on the
earth. They feel so dead."

"Are your feet well rubbed to draw down the circulation?"

"They are rubbed shiny and almost skinned, David. No one ever had better
care, of that I am sure. Go gather what you should have."

"All right," said the Harvester.

He arose and as he started to leave the room he took one last look at
the Girl to see if he could detect anything he could suggest for
her comfort, and read a message in her eyes. Instantly there was an
answering flash in his.

"I'll be back in a minute," he said. "I just noticed discorea villosa
has the finest rattle boxes formed. I've been waiting to show you. And
the hop tree has its castanets all green and gold. In a few more weeks
it will begin to play for you. I'll bring you some."

Soon he returned with the queer seed formations, and as he bent above
her, with his back to Doctor Harmon, he whispered, "What is it?"

Her lips barely formed the one word, "Hurry!"

The Harvester straightened.

"All comfortable, Ruth?" he asked casually.

"Yes."

"You understand, of course, that there is not the slightest necessity
for my going to work if you really want me for anything, even if it's
nothing more than to have me within calling distance, in case you SHOULD
want something. The whole lot I can gather now won't amount to twenty
dollars. It's merely a matter of pride with me to have what is called
for. I'd much rather remain, if you can use me in any way at all."

"Twenty dollars is considerable, when expenses are as heavy as now. And
it's worth more than any money to you not to fail when orders come. I
have learned that, and David, I don't want you to either. You must
fill all demands as usual. I wouldn't forgive myself this winter if you
should be forced to send orders only partly filled because I fell ill
and hindered you. Please go and gather all you possibly will need of
everything you take at this season, only remember!"

"There is no danger of my forgetting. If you are going to send me away
to work, you will allow me to kiss your hand before I go, fair lady?"

He did it fervently.

"One word with you, Harmon," he said as he left the room.

Doctor Harmon arose and followed him to the gold garden, and together
they stood beside the molten hedge of sunflowers, coneflowers,
elecampane, and jewel flower.

"I merely want to mention that this is your inning," said the Harvester.
"Find out if you are essential to the Girl's happiness as soon as you
can, and the day she tells me so, I will file her petition and take a
trip to the city to study some little chemical quirks that bother me.
That's all."

The Harvester went to the dry-house for bags and clipping shears, and
the doctor returned to the sunshine room.

"Ruth," he said, "do you know that the Harvester is the squarest man I
ever met?"

"Is he?" asked the Girl.

"He is! He certainly is!"

"You must remember that I have little acquaintance with men," said she.
"You are the first one I ever knew, and the only one except him."

"Well I try to be square," said Doctor Harmon, "but that is where
Langston has me beaten a mile. I have to try. He doesn't. He was born
that way."

The Girl began to laugh.

"His environment is so different," she said. "Perhaps if he were in a
big city, he would have to try also."

"Won't do!" said the doctor. "He chose his location. So did I. He is a
stronger physical man than I ever was or ever will be. The struggle
that bound him to the woods and to research, that made him the master
of forces that give back life, when a man like Carey says it is the
end, proves him a master. The tumult in his soul must have been like a
cyclone in his forest, when he turned his back on the world and stuck to
the woods. Carey told me about it. Some day you must hear. It's a story
a woman ought to know in order to arrive at proper values. You never
will understand the man until you know that he is clean where most of
us are blackened with ugly sins we have no right on God's footstool to
commit and not so much reason as he. Every man should be as he is, but
very few are. Carey says Langston's mother was a wonderful element in
the formation of his character; but all mothers are anxious, and none of
them can build with no foundation and no soul timber. She had material
for a man to her hand, or she couldn't have made one."

"I see what you mean."

"So far as any inexperienced girl ever sees," said the doctor. "Some day
if you live to fifty you will know, but you can't comprehend it now."

"If you think I lived all my life in Chicago's poverty spots and don't
know unbridled human nature!"

"I found you and your mother unusually innocent women. You may
understand some things. I hope you do. It will help you to decide who is
the real man among the men who come into your life. There are some men,
Ruth, who are fit to mate with a woman, and to perpetuate themselves and
their mental and moral forces in children, who will be like them, and
there are others who are not. It is these 'others' who are responsible
for the sin of the world, the sickness and suffering. Any time you are
sure you have a chance at a moral man, square and honest, in control of
his brain and body, if you are a wise woman, Ruth, stick to him as the
limpet to the rock."

"You mean stick to the Harvester?"

"If you are a wise woman!"

"When was a woman ever wise?"

"A few have been. They are the only care-free, really happy ones of the
world, the only wives without a big, poison, blue-bottle fly in their
ointment."

"I detest flies!" said the Girl.

"So do I," said the doctor. "For this reason I say to you choose the
ointment that never had one in it. Take the man who is 'master of his
fate, captain of his soul.' Stick to the Harvester! He is infinitely the
better man!"

"Well have you seen anything to indicate that I wasn't sticking?" asked
the Girl.

"No. And for your sake I hope I never will."

She laughed softly.

"You do love him, Ruth?"

"As I did my mother, yes. There is not a trace in my heart of the thing
he calls love."

"You have been stunted, warped, and the fountains of life never have
opened. It will come with right conditions of living."

"Do you think so?"

"I know so. At least there is no one else you love, Ruth?"

"No one except you."

"And do you feel about me just as you do him?"

"No! It is different. What I owe him is for myself. What I owe you is
for my mother. You saw! You know! You understand what you did for her,
and what it meant to me. The Harvester must be the finest man on earth,
but when I try to think of either God or Heaven, your face intervenes."

"That's all right, Ruth, I'm so glad you told me," said Doctor Harmon.
"I can make it all perfectly clear to you. You just go on and worship me
all you please. It's bound to make a cleaner, better man of me. What you
feel for me will hold me to a higher moral level all my life than I ever
have known before; but never forget that you are not going to live in
Heaven. You will be here at least sixty years yet, so when you come to
think of selecting a partner for the relations of the world, you stick
to the finest man on earth; see?"

"I do!" said the Girl. "I saw you kiss Molly a week ago. She is lovely,
and I hope you will be perfectly happy. It won't interfere with my
worshipping you; not the least in the world. Go ahead and be joyful!"

The doctor sprang to his feet in crimson confusion. The Girl lay and
laughed at him.

"Don't!" she cried. "It's all right! It takes a weight off my soul as
heavy as a mountain. I do adore you, as I said. But every hour since I
left Chicago a big, black cloud has hung over me. I didn't feel free.
I didn't feel absolved. I felt that my obligations to you were so heavy
that when I had settled the last of the money debt I was in honour
bound----"

"Don't, Ruth! Forget those dreadful times, as I told you then! Think
only of a happy future!"

"Let me finish," said the Girl. "Let me get this out of my system with
the other poison. From the day I came here, I've whispered in my heart,
'I am not free!' But if you love another woman! If you are going to
take her to your heart and to your lips, why that is my release. Oh Man,
speak the words! Tell me I am free indeed!"

"Ruth, be quiet, for mercy sake! You'll raise a temperature, and the
Harvester will pitch me into the lake. You are free, child, of course!
You always have been. I understood the awful pressure that was on you
with the very first glimpse I had of your mother. Who was she, Ruth?"

"She never would tell me."

"She thought you would appeal to her people?"

"She knew I would! I couldn't have helped it."

"Would you like to know?"

"I never want to. It is too late. I infinitely prefer to remain in
ignorance. Talk of something else."

"Let me read a wonderful book I found on the Harvester's shelves."

"Anything there will contain wonders, because he only buys what appeals
to him, and it takes a great book to do that. I am going to learn. He
will teach me, and when I come within comprehending distance of him,
then we are going on together."

"What an attractive place this is!"

"Isn't it? I only have seen enough to understand the plan. I scarcely
can wait to set my feet on earth and go into detail. Granny Moreland
says that when spring comes over the hill, and brings up the flowers in
the big woods, she'd rather walk through them than to read Revelation.
She says it gives her an idea of Heaven she can come closer realizing
and it seems more stable. You know she worries about the foundations.
She can't understand what supports Heaven. But up there in Medicine
Woods the old dear gets so close her God that some day she is going to
realize that her idea of Heaven there is quite as near right as marble
streets and gold pillars and vastly more probable. The day I reach that
hill top again, Heaven begins for me. Do you know the wonderful thing
the Harvester did up there?"

"Under the oak?"

"Yes."

"Carey told me. It was marvellous."

"Not such a marvel as another the doctor couldn't have known. The
Harvester made passing out so natural, so easy, so a part of elemental
forces, that I almost have forgotten her tortured body. When I think of
her now, it is to wonder if next summer I can distinguish her whisper
among the leaves. Before you go, I'll take you up there and tell you
what he says, and show you what he means, and you will feel it also."

"What if I shouldn't go?"

"What do you mean?"

"Doctor Carey has offered me a splendid position in his hospital. There
would be work all day, instead of waiting all day in the hope of working
an hour. There would be a living in it for two from the word go. There
would be better air, longer life, more to be got out of it, and if I can
make good, Carey's work to take up as he grows old."

"Take it! Take it quickly!" cried the Girl. "Don't wait a minute! You
might wear out your heart in Chicago for twenty years or forever, and
not have an opportunity to do one half so much good. Take it at once!"

"I was waiting to learn what you and Langston would say."

"He will say take it."

"Then I will be too happy for words. Ruth, you have not only paid the
debt, but you have brought me the greatest joy a man ever had. And there
is no need to wait the ages I thought I must. He can tell in a year if I
can do the work, and I know I can now; so it's all settled, if Langston
agrees."

"He will," said the Girl. "Let me tell him!"

"I wish you would," said the doctor. "I don't know just how to go at
it."

Then for two days the Harvester and Belshazzar gathered herbs and spread
them on the drying trays. On the afternoon of the third, close three,
the doctor came to the door.

"Langston," he said, "we have a call for you. We can't keep Ruth quiet
much longer. She is tired. We want to change her bed completely. She
won't allow either of us to lift her. She says we hurt her. Will you
come and try it?"

"You'll have to give me time to dip and rub off and get into clean
clothing," he said. "I've been keeping away, because I was working on
time, and I smell to strangulation of stramonium and saffron."

"Can't give you ten seconds," said the doctor. "Our temper is getting
brittle. We are cross as the proverbial fever patient. If you don't come
at once we will imagine you don't want to, and refuse to be moved at
all."

"Coming!" cried the Harvester, as he plunged his hands in the wash bowl
and soused his face. A second later he appeared on the porch.

"Ruth," he said, "I am steeped in the odours of the dry-house. Can't you
wait until I bathe and dress?"

"No, I can't," said a fretful voice. "I can't endure this bed another
minute."

"Then let Doctor Harmon lift you. He is so fresh and clean."

The Harvester glanced enviously at the shaven face and white trousers
and shirt of the doctor.

"I just hate fresh, clean men. I want to smell herbs. I want to put my
feet in the dirt and my hands in the water."

The Harvester came at a rush. He brought a big easy chair from the
living-room, straightened the cover, and bent above the Girl. He picked
her up lightly, gently, and easing her to his body settled in the chair.
She laid her face on his shoulder, and heaved a deep sigh of content.

"Be careful with my back, Man," she said. "I think my spine is almost
worn through."

"Poor girl," said the Harvester. "That bed should be softer."

"It should not!" contradicted the Girl. "It should be much harder. I'm
tired of soft beds. I want to lie on the earth, with my head on a root;
and I wish it would rain dirt on me. I am bathed threadbare. I want to
be all streaky."

"I understand," said the Harvester. "Harmon, bring me a pad and pencil
a minute, I must write an order for some things I want. Will you call up
town and have them sent out immediately?"

On the pad he wrote: "Telephone Carey to get the highest grade
curled-hair mattress, a new pad, and pillow, and bring them flying in
the car. Call Granny and the girl and empty the room. Clean, air, and
fumigate it thoroughly. Arrange the furniture differently, and help me
into the living-room with Ruth." He handed the pad to the doctor.

"Please attend to that," he said, and to the Girl: "Now we go on a
journey. Doc, you and Molly take the corners of the rug we are on and
slide us into the other room until you get this aired and freshened."

In the living-room the Girl took one long look at the surroundings
and suddenly relaxed. She cuddled against the Harvester and lifting a
tremulous white hand, drew it across his unshaven cheek.

"Feels so good," she said. "I'm sick and tired of immaculate men."

The Harvester laughed, tucked her feet in the cover and held her
tenderly. The Girl lay with her cheek against the rough khaki, palpitant
with the excitement of being moved.

"Isn't it great?" she panted.

He caught the hand that had touched his cheek in a tender grip, and
laughed a deep rumble of exultation that came from the depths of his
heart.

"There's no name for it, honey," he said. "But don't try to talk until
you have a long rest. Changing positions after you have lain so long may
be making unusual work for your heart. Am I hurting your back?"

"No," said the Girl. "This is the first time I have been comfortable in
ages. Am I tiring you?"

"Yes," laughed the Harvester. "You are almost as heavy as a large sack
of leaves, but not quite equal to a bridge pillar or a log. Be sure to
think of that, and worry considerably. You are in danger of straining my
muscles to the last degree, my heart included."

"Where is your heart?" whispered the Girl.

"Right under your cheek," answered the Harvester. "But for Heaven's
sake, don't intimate that you are taking any interest in it, or it will
go to pounding until your head will bounce. It's one member of my body
that I can't control where you are concerned."

"I thought you didn't like me any more."

"Careful!" warned the Harvester. "You are yet too close Heaven to fib
like that, Ruth. What have I done to indicate that I don't love you more
than ever?"

"Stayed away nearly every minute for three awful days, and wouldn't come
without being dragged; and now you're wishing they would hurry and fix
that bed, so you can put me down and go back to your rank old herbs
again."

"Well of all the black prevarications! I went when you sent me, and
came when you called. I'd willingly give up my hope of what Granny calls
'salvation' to hold you as I am for an hour, and you know it."

"It's going to be much longer than that," said the Girl nestling to him.
"I asked for you because you never hurt me, and they always do. I knew
you were so strong that my weight now wouldn't be a load for one of your
hands, and I am not going back to that bed until I am so tired that I
will be glad to lie down."

For a long time she was so silent the Harvester thought her going to
sleep; and having learned that for him joy was probably transient, he
deliberately got all he could. He closely held the hand she had not
withdrawn, and often lifted it to his lips. Sometimes he stroked the
heavy braid, gently ran his hands across the tired shoulders, or eased
her into a different position. There was not a doubt in his mind of one
thing. He was having a royal, good time, and he was thankful for the
work he had set his assistants that kept them out of the room. They
seemed in no hurry, and from scuffling, laughing, and a steady stream of
talk, they were entertained at least. At last the Girl roused.

"There is something I want to ask you," she said. "I promised Doctor
Harmon I would."

Instantly the heart of the Harvester gave a leap that jarred the head
resting on it.

"You don't like him?" questioned the Girl.

"I do!" declared the Harvester. "I like him immensely. There is not a
fine, manly good-looking feature about him that I have missed. I don't
fail to do him justice on every point."

"I'm so glad! Then you will want him to remain."

"Here?" asked the Harvester with a light, hot breath.

"In Onabasha! Doctor Carey has offered him the place of chief assistant
at the hospital. There is a good salary and the chance of taking up
the doctor's work as he grows older. It means plenty to do at once,
healthful atmosphere, congenial society----everything to a young man.
He only had a call once in a while in Chicago, often among people who
received more than they paid, like me, and he was very lonely. I think
it would be great for him."

"And for you, Ruth?"

"It doesn't make the least difference to me; but for his sake, because I
think so much of him, I would like to see him have the place."

"You still think so much of him, Ruth?"

"More, if possible," said the Girl. "Added to all I owed him before, he
has come here and worked for days to save me, and it wasn't his fault
that it took a bigger man. Nothing alters the fact that he did all he
could, most graciously and gladly."

"What do you mean, Ruth?" stammered the Harvester.

"Oh they have worn themselves out!" cried the Girl impatiently. "First,
Granny Moreland told me every least little detail of how I went out, and
you resurrected me. I knew what she said was true, because she worked
with you. Then Doctor Carey told me, and Mrs. Carey, and Doctor Harmon,
and Molly, and even Granny's little assistant has left the kitchen to
tell me that I owe my life to you, and all of them might as well have
saved breath. I knew all the time that if ever I came out of this, and
had a chance to be like other women, it would be your work, and I'm glad
it is. I'd hate to be under obligations to some people I know; but I
feel honoured to be indebted to you."

"I'm mighty sorry they worried you. I had no idea----"

"They didn't 'worry,' me! I am just telling you that I knew it all the
time; that's all!"

"Forget that!" said the Harvester. "Come back to our subject. What was
it you wanted, dear?"

"To know if you have any objections to Doctor Harmon remaining in
Onabasha?"

"Certainly not! It will be a fine thing for him."

"Will it make any difference to you in any way?"

"Ruth, that's probing too deep," said the Harvester.

"I don't see why!"

"I'm glad of it!"

"Why?"

"I'd least rather show my littleness to you than to any one else on
earth."

"Then you have some feeling about it?"

"Perhaps a trifle. I'll get over it. Give me a little time to adjust
myself. Doctor Harmon shall have the place, of course. Don't worry about
that!"

"He will be so happy!"

"And you, Ruth?"

"I'll be happy too!"

"Then it's all right," said the Harvester.

He laid down her hand, drew the cover over it, and slightly shifted her
position to rest her. The door opened, and Doctor Harmon announced that
the room was ready. It was shining and fresh. The bed was now turned
with its head to the north, so that from it one could see the big
trees in Medicine Woods, the sweep of the hillside, the sparkle of
mallow-bordered Singing Water, the driveway and the gold flower
garden. Everything was so changed that the room had quite a different
appearance. The instant he laid her on it the Girl said, "This bed is
not mine."

"Yes it is," said the Harvester. "You see, we were a little excited
sometimes, and we spilled a few quarts of perfectly good medicine on
your mattress. It was hopelessly smelly and ruined; so I am going to
cremate it and this is your splinter new one and a fresh pad and
pillow. Now you try them and see if they are not much harder and more
comfortable."

"This is just perfect!" she sighed, as she sank into the bed.

The Harvester bent over her to straighten the cover, when suddenly
she reached both arms around his neck, and gripped him with all her
strength.

"Thank you!" she said.

"May I hold you to-morrow?" whispered the Harvester, emboldened by this.

"Please do," said the Girl.

The Harvester, with dog to heel, went to the oak to think.

"Belshazzar, kommen Sie!" said the man, dropping on the seat and holding
out his hand. The dog laid his muzzle in the firm grip.

"Bel," said the Harvester, "I am all at sea. One day I think maybe I
have a little chance, the next----none at all. I had an hour of solid
comfort to-day, now I'm in the sweat box again. It's a little selfish
streak in me, Bel, that hates to see Harmon go into the hospital and
take my place with the Careys. They are my best and only friends. He is
young, social, handsome, and will be ever present. In three months he
will become so popular that I might as well be off the earth. I wish I
didn't think it, but I'm so small that I do. And then there is my
Dream Girl, Bel. The girl you found for me, old fellow. There never was
another like her, and she has my heart for all time. And he has hers.
That hospital plan is the best thing in the world for her. It will keep
her where Carey can have an eye on her, where the air is better, where
she can have company without the city crush, where she is close the
country, and a good living is assured. Bel, it's the nicest arrangement
you ever saw for every one we know, except us."

The Harvester laughed shortly. "Bel," he said, "tell me! If a man lived
a hundred years, could he have the heartache all the way? Seems like
I've had it almost that long now. In fact, I've had it such ages I'd
be lonesome without it. This is some more of my very own medicine, so I
shouldn't make a wry face over taking it. I knew what would happen when
I sent for him, and I didn't hesitate. I must not now.

"Only I got to stop one thing, Bel. I told him I would play square,
and I have. But here it ends. After this, I must step back and be big
brother. Lots of fun in this brother business, Bel. But maybe I am cut
out for it. Anyway it's written! But if it is, how did she come to allow
me such privileges as I took to-day? That wasn't professional by any
means. It was just the stiffest love-making I knew how to do, Bel, and
she didn't object by the quiver of an eyelash. God knows I was watching
closely enough for any sign that I was distasteful. And I might have
been well enough. Rough, herb-stained old clothes, unshaven, everything
to offend a dainty girl. She said I might hold her again to-morrow. And,
Bel, what the nation did she hug me like that for, if she's going to
marry him? Boy, I see my way clear to an hour more. While I'm at it,
just to surprise myself, I believe I'll take it like other men. I think
I'll go on a little <DW12>, and make what probably will be the last day
a plumb good one. Something worth remembering is better than nothing
at all, Bel! He hasn't told me that he has won. She didn't SAY she was
going to marry him, and she did say he hurt her, and she wanted me. Bel,
how about the grimness of it, if she should marry him and then discover
that he hurts her, and she wants me. Lord God Almighty, if you have any
mercy at all, never put me up against that," prayed the Harvester, "for
my heart is water where she is concerned."

The Harvester arose, and going to the lake, he cut an arm load of big,
pink mallows, covered each mound with fresh flowers, whistled to the
dog, and went to his work. Many things had accumulated, and he cleaned
the barn, carried herbs from the dry-house to the store-room, and put
everything into shape. Close noon the next day he went to Onabasha, and
was gone three hours. He came back barbered in the latest style, and
carrying a big bundle. When the hour for arranging the bed came, he was
yet in his room, but he sent word he would be there in a second.

As he crossed the living-room he pulled a chair to the veranda and
placed a footstool before it. Then he stepped into the sunshine room. A
quizzical expression crossed the face of Doctor Harmon as he closed the
book he was reading aloud to the Girl and arose. Wholly unembarrassed
the Harvester smiled.

"Have I got this rigging anywhere near right?" he inquired.

"David, what have you done?" gasped the amazed Girl.

"I didn't feel anywhere near up to the 'mark of my high calling'
yesterday," quoted the Harvester. "I don't know how I appear, but I'm
clean as shaving, soap and hot water will make me, and my clothing will
not smell offensively. Now come out of that bed for a happy hour. Where
is that big coverlet? You are going on the veranda to-day."

"You look just like every one else," complained Doctor Harmon.

"You look perfectly lovely," declared the Girl.

"The swale sends you this invitation to come and see star-shine at the
foot of mullein hill," said the Harvester, offering a bouquet. It was a
loose bunch of long-stemmed, delicate flowers, each an inch across, and
having five pearl-white petals lightly striped with pale green. Five
long gold anthers arose, and at their base gold stamens and a green
pistil. The leaves were heart-shaped and frosty, whitish-green,
resembling felt. The Harvester bent to offer them.

"Have some Grass of Parnassus, my dear," he said.

The Girl waved them away. "Go stand over there by the door and slowly
turn around. I want to see you."

The Harvester obeyed. He was freshly and carefully shaven. His hair
was closely cropped at the base of the head, long, heavy, and slightly
waving on top. He wore a white silk shirt, with a rolling collar and
tie, white trousers, belt, hose, and shoes, and his hands were manicured
with care.

"Have I made a mess of it, or do I appear anything like other men?" he
asked, eagerly.

The Girl lifted her eyes to Doctor Harmon and smiled.

"Do you observe anything messy?" she inquired.

"You needn't fish for compliments quite so obviously," he answered.
"I'll pay them without being asked. I do not. He is quite correct, and
infinitely better looking than the average. Distinguished is a proper
word for the gentleman in my opinion. But why, in Heaven's name, have we
never had the pleasure of seeing you thus before?"

"Look here, Doc," said the Harvester, "do you mean that you enjoy
looking at me merely because I am dressed this way?"

"I do indeed," said the doctor. "It is good to see you with the garb of
work laid aside, and the stamp of cleanliness and ease upon you."

"By gum, that is rubbing it in a little too rough!" cried the Harvester.
"I bathe oftener than you do. My clothing is always clean when I start
out. Of course, in my work I come hourly in contact with muck, water,
and herb juices."

"It's understood that is unavoidable," said Doctor Harmon.

"And if cleanliness is made an issue, I'd rather roll in any of it
than put my finger tips into the daily work of a surgeon," added the
Harvester, and the Girl giggled.

"That's enough Medicine Man!" she said. "You did not make a 'mess' of
it, or anything else you ever attempted. As for appearing like other
men, thank Heaven, you do not. You look just a whole world bigger and
better and finer. Come, carry me out quickly. I am wild to go. Please
put my lovely flowers in water, Molly, only give me a few to hold."

The Harvester arranged the pink coverlet, picked up the Girl, and
carried her to the living-room.

"We will rest here a little," he said, "and then, if you feel equal to
it, we will try the veranda. Are you easy now?"

She nestled her face against the soft shirt and smiled at him. She
lifted her hand, laid it on his smooth cheek and then the crisp hair.

"Oh Man!" she cried. "Thank God you didn't give me up, too! I want life!
I want LIFE!"

The Harvester tightened his grip just a trifle. "Then I thank God, too,"
he said. "Can you tell me how you are, dear? Is there any difference?"

"Yes," she answered. "I grow tired lying so long, but there isn't the
ghost of an ache in my bones. I can just feel pure, delicious blood
running in my veins. My hands and feet are always warm, and my head
cool."

The Harvester's face drew very close. "How about your heart, honey?" he
whispered. "Anything new there?"

"Yes, I am all over new inside and out. I want to shout, run, sing, and
swim. Oh I'd give anything to have you carry me down and dip me in the
lake right now."

"Soon, Girl! That will come soon," prophesied the Harvester.

"I scarcely can wait. And you did say a saddle, didn't you? Won't it be
great to come galloping up the levee, when the leaves are red and the
frost is in the air. Oh am I going fast enough?"

"Much faster than I expected," said the Harvester. "You are surprising
all of us, me most of any. Ruth, you almost make me hope that you regard
this as home. Honey, you are thinking a little of me these days?"

The hand that had fallen from his hair lay on his shoulder. Now it slid
around his neck, and gripped him with all its strength.

"Heaps and heaps!" she said. "All I get a chance to, for being bothered
and fussed over, and everlastingly read mushy stuff that's intended for
some one else. Please take me to the veranda now; I want to tell you
something."

His head swam, but the Harvester set his feet firmly, arose, and carried
his Dream Girl back to outdoor life. When he reached the chair, she
begged him to go a few steps farther to the bench on the lake shore.

"I am afraid," said the man.

"It's so warm. There can't be any difference in the air. Just a minute."

The Harvester pushed open the screen, went to the bench, and seating
himself, drew the cover closely around her.

"Don't speak a word for a long time," he said. "Just rest. If I tire you
too much and spoil everything, I will be desperate."

He clasped her to him, laid his cheek against her hair, and his lips on
her forehead. He held her hand and kissed it over and over, and again
he watched and could find no resentment. The cool, pungent breeze swept
from the lake, and the voices of wild life chattered at their feet.
Sometimes the water folks splashed, while a big black and gold butterfly
mistook the Girl's dark hair for a perching place and settled on it,
slowly opening its wonderful wings.

"Lie quietly, Girl," whispered the Harvester. "You are wearing a living
jewel, an ornament above price, on your hair. Maybe you can see it when
it goes. There!"

"Oh I did!" she cried. "How I love it here! Before long may I lie in the
dining-room window a while so I can see the water. I like the hill, but
I love the lake more."

"Now if you just would love me," said the Harvester, "you would have all
Medicine Woods in your heart."

"Don't hurry me so!" said the Girl. "You gave me a year; and it's only a
few weeks, and I've not been myself, and I'm not now. I mustn't make any
mistake, and all I know for sure is that I want you most, and I can rest
best with you, and I miss you every minute you are gone. I think that
should satisfy you."

"That would be enough for any reasonable man," said the Harvester
angrily. "Forgive me, Ruth, I have been cruel. I forgot how frail and
weak you are. It is having Harmon here that makes me unnatural. It
almost drives me to frenzy to know that he may take you from me."

"Then send him away!"

"SEND HIM AWAY?"

"Yes, send him away! I am tired to death of his poetry, and seeing him
spoon around. Send both of them away quickly!"

The Harvester gulped, blinked, and surreptitiously felt for her pulse.

"Oh, I've not developed fever again," she said. "I'm all right. But it
must be a fearful expense to have both of them here by the week, and I'm
so tired of them, Granny says she can take care of me just as well,
and the girl who helps her can cook. No one but you shall lift me, if I
don't get my nose Out until I can walk alone Both of them are perfectly
useless, and I'd much rather you'd send them away."

"There, there! Of course!" said the Harvester soothingly. "I'll do it
as soon as I possibly dare. You don't understand, honey. You are yet
delicate beyond measure, internally. The fever burned so long. Every
morsel you eat is measured and cooked in sterilized vessels, and I'd be
scared of my life to have the girl undertake it."

"Why she is doing it straight along now! She and Granny! Molly isn't out
of Doctor Harmon's sight long enough to cook anything. Granny says there
is 'a lot of buncombe about what they do, and she is going to tell them
so right to their teeth some of these days, if they badger her much
more,' and I wish she would, and you, too."

The Harvester gathered the Girl to him in one crushing bear hug.

"For the love of Heaven, Ruth, you drive me crazy! Answer me just one
question. When you told me that you 'adored and worshipped' Doctor
Harmon, did you mean it, or was that the delirium of fever?"

"I don't know WHAT I told you! If I said I 'adored' him, it was the
truth. I did! I do! I always will! So do I adore the Almighty, but
that's no sign I want him to read poetry to me, and be around all the
time when I am wild for a minute with you. I can worship Doctor Harmon
in Chicago or Onabasha quite as well. Fire him! If you don't, I will!"

"Good Lord!" cried the Harvester, helpless until the Girl had to cling
to him to prevent rolling from his nerveless arms. "Ruth, Ruth, will you
feel my pulse?"

"No, I won't! But you are going to drop me. Take me straight back to my
beautiful new bed, and send them away."

"A minute! Give me a minute!" gasped the Harvester. "I couldn't lift a
baby just now. Ruth, dear, I thought you LOVED the man."

"What made you think so?"

"You did!"

"I didn't either! I never said I loved him. I said I was under
obligations to him; but they are as well repaid as they ever can be. I
said I adored him, and I tell you I do! Give him what we owe him, both
of us, in money, and send them away. If you'd seen as much of them as I
have, you'd be tired of them, too. Please, please, David!"

"Yes," said the Harvester, arising in a sudden tide of effulgent joy.
"Yes, Girl, just as quickly as I can with decency. I----I'll send them
on the lake, and I'll take care of you."

"You won't read poetry to me?"

"I will not."

"You won't moon at me?"

"No!"

"Then hurry! But have them take your boat. I am going to have the first
ride in mine."

"Indeed you are, and soon, too!" said the Harvester, marching up the
hill as if he were leading hosts to battle.

He laid the Girl on the bed and covered her, and called Granny Moreland
to sit beside her a few minutes. He went into the gold garden and
proposed that the doctor and the nurse go rowing until supper time, and
they went with alacrity. When they started he returned to the Girl and,
sitting beside her, he told Granny to take a nap. Then he began to talk
softly all about wild music, and how it was made, and what the different
odours sweeping down the hill were, and when the red leaves would come,
and the nuts rattle down, and the frost fairies enamel the windows, and
soon she was sound asleep. Granny came back, and the Harvester walked
around the lake shore to be alone a while and think quietly, for he was
almost too dazed and bewildered for full realization.

As he softly followed the foot path he heard voices, and looking down,
he saw the boat lying in the shade and beneath a big tree on the bank
sat the doctor and the nurse. His arm was around her, and her head was
on his shoulder; and she said very distinctly, "How long will it be
until we can go without offending him?"



CHAPTER XIX. A VERTICAL SPINE

By middle September the last trace of illness had been removed from the
premises, and it was rapidly disappearing from the face and form of the
Girl. She was showing a beautiful roundness, there was lovely colour on
her cheeks and lips, and in her dark eyes sparkled a touch of mischief.
Rigidly she followed the rules laid down for diet and exercise, and as
strength flowed through her body, and no trace of pain tormented her,
she began revelling in new and delightful sensations. She loved to pull
her boat as she willed, drive over the wood road, study the books,
cook the new dishes, rearrange furniture, and go with the Harvester
everywhere.

But that was greatly the management of the man. He was so afraid that
something might happen to undo all the wonders accomplished in the Girl,
and again whiten her face with pain, that he scarcely allowed her out of
his sight. He remained in the cabin, helping when she worked, and then
drove with her and a big blanket to the woods, arranged her chair and
table, found some attractive subject, and while the wind ravelled her
hair and flushed her cheeks, her fingers drew designs. At noon they
went to the cabin to lunch, and the Girl took a nap, while the Harvester
spread his morning's reaping on the shelves to dry. They returned to
the woods until five o'clock; then home again and the Girl dressed
and prepared supper, while the Harvester spread his stores and fed the
stock. Then he put on white clothing for the evening. The Girl rested
while he washed the dishes, and they explored the lake in the little
motor boat, or drove to the city for supplies, or to see their friends.

"Are you even with your usual work at this time of the year?" she asked
as they sat at breakfast.

"I am," said the Harvester. "The only things that have been crowded out
are the candlesticks. They will have to remain on the shelf until the
herbs and roots are all in, and the long winter evenings come. Then I'll
use the luna pattern and finish yours first of all."

"What are you going to do to-day?"

"Start on a regular fall campaign. Some of it for the sake of having it,
and some because there is good money in it. Will you come?"

"Indeed yes. May I help, or shall I take my drawing along?"

"Bring your drawing. Next fall you may help, but as yet you are too
close suffering for me to see you do anything that might be even a
slight risk. I can't endure it."

"Baby!" she jeered.

"Christen me anything you please," laughed the Harvester. "I'm short on
names anyway."

He went to harness Betsy, and the Girl washed the dishes, straightened
the rooms, and collected her drawing material. Then she walked up the
hill, wearing a shirt and short skirt of khaki, stout shoes, and a straw
hat that shaded her face. She climbed into the wagon, laid the drawing
box on the seat, and caught the lines as the Harvester flung them to
her. He went swinging ahead, Belshazzar to heel, the Girl driving
after. The white pigeons circled above, and every day Ajax allowed his
curiosity to overcome his temper, and followed a little farther.

"Whoa, Betsy!" The Girl tugged at the lines; but Betsy took the bit
between her teeth, and plodded after the Harvester. She pulled with
all her might, but her strength was not nearly sufficient to stop the
stubborn animal.

"Whoa, David!" cried the Girl.

"What is it?" the Harvester turned.

"Won't you please wait until I can take off my hat? I love to ride
bareheaded through the woods, and Betsy won't stop until you do, no
matter how hard I pull."

"Betsy, you're no lady!" said the Harvester. "Why don't you stop when
you're told?"

"I shan't waste any more strength on her," said the Girl. "Hereafter I
shall say, 'Gee, David,' 'Haw, David,' 'Whoa, David,' and then she will
do exactly as you."

The Harvester stopped half way up the hill, and beside a large, shaded
bed spread the rug, and set up the little table and chair for the Girl.

"Want a plant to draw?" he asked. "This is very important to us. It
has a string of names as long as a princess, but I call it goldenseal,
because the roots are yellow. The chemists ask for hydrastis. That
sounds formidable, but it's a cousin of buttercups. The woods of Ohio
and Indiana produce the finest that ever grew, but it is so nearly
extinct now that the trade can be supplied by cultivation only. I
suspect I'm responsible for its disappearance around here. I used to get
a dollar fifty a pound, and most of my clothes and books when a boy I
owe to it. Now I get two for my finest grade; that accounts for the size
of these beds."

"It's pretty!" said the Girl, studying a plant averaging a foot in
height. On a slender, round, purplish stem arose one big, rough leaf,
heavily veined, and having from five to nine lobes. Opposite was a
similar leaf, but very small, and a head of scarlet berries resembling
a big raspberry in shape. The Harvester shook the black woods soil from
the yellow roots, and held up the plant.

"You won't enjoy the odour," he said.

"Well I like the leaves. I know I can use them some way. They are so
unusual. What wonderful colour in the roots!"

"One of its names is Indian paint," explained the Harvester. "Probably
it furnished the squaws of these woods with colouring matter. Now let's
see what we can get out of it. You draw the plant and I'll dig the
roots."

For a time the Girl bent over her work and the Harvester was busy.
Belshazzar ranged the woods chasing chipmunks. The birds came asking
questions. When the drawing was completed, other subjects were found at
every turn, and the Girl talked almost constantly, her face alive with
interest. The May-apple beds lay close, and she drew from them. She
learned the uses and prices of the plant, and also made drawings of
cohosh, moonseed and bloodroot. That was so wonderful in its root
colour, the Harvester filled the little cup with water and she began
to paint. Intensely absorbed she bent above the big, notched, silvery
leaves and the blood-red roots, testing and trying to match them
exactly. Every few minutes the Harvester leaned over her shoulder to see
how she was progressing and to offer suggestions. When she finished she
picked up a trailing vine of moonseed.

"You have this on the porch," she said. "I think it is lovely. There
is no end to the beautiful combinations of leaves, and these are such
pretty little grape-like clusters; but if you touch them the slightest
you soil the wonderful surface."

"And that makes the fairies very sad," said the Harvester. "They love
that vine best of any, because they paint its fruit with the most care.
'Bloom' the scientists call it. You see it on cultivated plums, grapes,
and apples, but never in any such perfection as on moonseed and black
haws in the woods. You should be able to design a number of pretty
things from the cohosh leaves and berries, too. You scarcely can get a
start this fall, but early in the spring you can begin, and follow the
season. If your work comes out well this winter, I'll send some of it to
the big publishing houses, and you can make book and magazine covers and
decorations, if you would like."

"'If I would like!' How modest! You know perfectly well that if I could
make a design that would be accepted, and used on a book or magazine, I
would almost fly. Oh do you suppose I could?"

"I don't 'suppose' anything about it, I know," said the Harvester. "It
is not possible that the public can be any more tired of wild roses,
golden-rod, and swallows than the poor art editors who accept them
because they can't help themselves. Dangle something fresh and new under
their noses and see them snap. The next time I go to Onabasha I'll get
you some popular magazines, and you can compare what is being used with
what you see here, and judge for yourself how glad they would be for a
change. And potteries, arts and crafts shops, and wall paper factories,
they'd be crazy for the designs I could furnish them. As for money,
there's more in it than the herbs, if I only could draw."

"I can do that," said the Girl. "Trail the vine and give me an idea
how to scale it. I'll just make studies now, and this winter I'll
conventionalize them and work them into patterns. Won't that be fun?"

"That's more than fun, Ruth," said the Harvester solemnly. "That is
creation. That touches the provinces of the Almighty. That is taking His
unknown wonders and making them into pleasure and benefit for thousands,
not to mention filling your face with awe divine, and lighting your eyes
with interest and ambition. That is life, Ruth. You are beginning to
live right now."

"I see," said the Girl. "I understand! I am!"

"You get your subjects now. When the harvest is over I'll show you what
I have in my head, and before Christmas the fun will begin."

"What next?"

"Sketch a sarsaparilla plant and this yam vine. It grows on your veranda
too----the rattle box, you remember. The leaves and seeding arrangements
are wonderful. You can do any number of things with them, and all will
be new."

He called her attention to and brought her samples of ginger leaves,
Indian hemp, queen-of-the-meadow, cone-flower, burdock, baneberry, and
Indian turnip, as he harvested them in turn. When they came to the large
beds of orange pleurisy root the Girl cried out with pleasure.

"We will take its prosaic features first," said the Harvester. "It is
good medicine and worth handling. Forget that! The Bird Woman calls it
butterfly flower. That's better. Now try to analyze a single bloom of
this gaudy mass, and you will see why there's poetry coming."

He knelt beside the Girl, separating the blooms and pointing out their
marvellous colour and construction. She leaned against his shoulder, and
watched with breathless interest. As his bare head brought its mop of
damp wind-rumpled hair close, she ran her fingers through it, and with
her handkerchief wiped his forehead.

"Sometimes I almost wish you'd get sick," she said irrelevantly.

"In the name of common sense, why?" demanded the Harvester.

"Oh it must be born in the heart of a woman to want to mother
something," answered the Girl. "I feel sometimes as if I would like to
take care of you, as if you were a little fellow. David, I know why
your mother fought to make you the man she desired. You must have been
charming when small. I can shut my eyes and just see the boy you were,
and I should have loved you as she did."

"How about the man I am?" inquired the Harvester promptly. "Any leanings
toward him yet, Ruth?"

"It's getting worser and worser every day and hour," said the Girl. "I
don't understand it at all. I wouldn't try to live without you. I don't
want you to leave my sight. Everything you do is the way I would have
it. Nothing you ever say shocks or offends me. I'd love to render you
any personal service. I want to take you in my arms and hug you tight
half a dozen times a day as a reward for the kind and lovely things you
do for me."

A dull red flamed up the neck and over the face of the Harvester. One
arm lifted to the chair back, the other dropped across the table so that
the Girl was almost encircled.

"For the love of mercy, Ruth, why haven't I had a hint of this before?"
he cried.

"You said you'd hate me. You said you'd drop me into the deepest part of
the lake if I deceived you; and if I have to tell the truth, why, that
is all of it. I think it is nonsense about some wonderful feeling that
is going to take possession of your heart when you love any one. I love
you so much I'd gladly suffer to save you pain or sorrow. But there are
no thrills; it's just steady, sober, common sense that I should love
you, and I do. Why can't you be satisfied with what I can give, David?"

"Because it's husks and ashes," said the Harvester grimly. "You drive me
to desperation, Ruth. I am almost wild for your love, but what you offer
me is plain, straight affection, nothing more. There isn't a trace of
the feeling that should exist between man and wife in it. Some men might
be satisfied to be your husband, and be regarded as a father or brother.
I am not. The red bird didn't want a sister, Ruth, he was asking for a
mate. So am I. That's as plain as I know how to put it. There is some
way to awaken you into a living, loving woman, and, please God, I'll
find it yet, but I'm slow about it; there's no question of that. Never
you mind! Don't worry! Some of these days I have faith to believe it
will sweep you as a tide sweeps the shore, and then I hope God will be
good enough to let me be where you will land in my arms."

The Girl sat looking at him between narrowed lids. Suddenly she took his
head between her hands, drew his face to hers and deliberately kissed
him. Then she drew away and searched his eyes.

"There!" she challenged. "What is the matter with that?"

The Harvester's colour slowly faded to a sickly white.

"Ruth, you try me almost beyond human endurance," he said. "'What's the
matter with that?'" He arose, stepped back, folded his arms, and stared
at her. "'What's the matter with that?'" he repeated. "Never was I so
sorely tempted in all my life as I am now to lie to you, and say there
is nothing, and take you in my arms and try to awaken you to what I
mean by love. But suppose I do----and fail! Then comes the agony of slow
endurance for me, and the possibility that any day you may meet the man
who can arouse in you the feelings I cannot. That would mean my oath
broken, and my heart as well; while soon you would dislike me beyond
tolerance, even. I dare not risk it! The matter is, that was the loving
caress of a ten-year-old girl to a big brother she admired. That's all!
Not much, but a mighty big defect when it is offered a strong man as
fuel on which to feed consuming passion."

"Consuming passion," repeated the Girl. "David you never lie, and you
never exaggerate. Do you honestly mean that there is something----oh,
there is! I can see it! You are really suffering, and if I come to you,
and try my best to comfort you, you'll only call it baby affection that
you don't want. David, what am I going to do?"

"You are going to the cabin," said the Harvester, "and cook us a big
supper. I am dreadfully hungry. I'll be along presently. Don't worry,
Ruth, you are all right! That kiss was lovely. Tell me that you are not
angry with me."

Her eyes were wet as she smiled at him.

"If there is a bigger brute than a man anywhere on the footstool, I
should like to meet it," said the Harvester, "and see what it appears
like. Go along, honey; I'll be there as soon as I load."

He drove to the dry-house, washed and spread his reaping on the big
trays, fed the stock, dressed in the white clothing and entered the
kitchen. That the Girl had been crying was obvious, but he overlooked
it, helped with the work, and then they took a boat ride. When they
returned he proposed that she should select her favourite likeness of
her mother, and the next time he went to the city he would take it
with his, and order the enlargements he had planned. To save carrying
a lighted lamp into the closet he brought her little trunk to the
living-room, where she opened it and hunted the pictures. There were
several, and all of them were of a young, elegantly dressed woman of
great beauty. The Harvester studied them long.

"Who was she, Ruth?" he asked at last.

"I don't know, and I have no desire to learn."

"Can you explain how the girl here represented came to marry a brother
of Henry Jameson?"

"Yes. I was past twelve when my father came the last time, and I
remember him distinctly. If Uncle Henry were properly clothed, he is
not a bad man in appearance, unless he is very angry. He can use proper
language, if he chooses. My father was the best in him, refined and
intensified. He was much taller, very good looking, and he dressed and
spoke well. They were born and grew to manhood in the East, and came out
here at the same time. Where Uncle Henry is a trickster and a trader
in stock, my father went a step higher, and tricked and traded in
men----and women! Mother told me this much once. He saw her somewhere
and admired her. He learned who she was, went to her father's law office
and pretended he was representing some great business in the West, until
he was welcomed as a promising client. He hung around and when she came
in one day her father was forced to introduce them. The remainder is the
same world-old story----a good looking, glib-tongued man, plying every
art known to an expert, on an innocent girl."

"Is he dead, Ruth?"

"We thought so. We hoped so."

"Your mother did not feel that her people might be suffering for her as
she was for them?"

"Not after she appealed to them twice and received no reply."

"Perhaps they tried to find her. Maybe she has a father or mother who
is longing for word from her now. Are you very sure you are right in not
wanting to know?"

"She never gave me a hint from which I could tell who or where they
were. In so gentle a woman as my mother that only could mean she did not
want them to know of her. Neither do I. This is the photograph I prefer;
please use it."

"I'll put back the trunk in the morning, when I can see better," said
the Harvester.

The Girl closed it, and soon went to bed. But there was no sleep for
the man. He went into the night, and for hours he paced the driveway in
racking thought. Then he sat on the step and looked at Belshazzar before
him.

"Life's growing easier every minute, Bel," said the Harvester. "Here's
my Dream Girl, lovely as the most golden instant of that wonderful
dream, offering me----offering me, Bel----in my present pass, the lips
and the love of my little sister who never was born. And I've hurt
Ruth's feelings, and sent her to bed with a heartache, trying to make
her see that it won't do. It won't, Bel! If I can't have genuine love, I
don't want anything. I told her so as plainly as I could find words, and
set her crying, and made her unhappy to end a wonderful day. But in
some way she has got to learn that propinquity, tolerance, approval,
affection, even----is not love. I can't take the risk, after all these
years of waiting for the real thing. If I did, and love never came, I
would end----well, I know how I would end----and that would spoil her
life. I simply have got to brace up, Bel, and keep on trying. She thinks
it is nonsense about thrills, and some wonderful feeling that takes
possession of you. Lord, Bel! There isn't much nonsense about the thing
that rages in my brain, heart, soul, and body. It strikes me as the
gravest reality that ever overtook a man.

"She is growing wonderfully attached to me. 'Couldn't live without me,'
Bel, that is what she said. Maybe it would be a scheme to bring Granny
here to stay with her, and take a few months in some city this winter
on those chemical points that trouble me. There is an old saying about
'absence making the heart grow fonder.' Maybe separation is the thing to
work the trick. I've tried about everything else I know.

"But I'm in too much of a hurry! What a fool a man is! A few weeks ago,
Bel, I said to myself that if Harmon were away and had no part in her
life I'd be the happiest man alive. Happiest man alive! Bel, take a look
at me now! Happy! Well, why shouldn't I be happy? She is here. She is
growing in strength and beauty every hour. She cares more for me day
by day. From an outside viewpoint it seems as if I had almost all a man
could ask in reason. But when was a strong man in the grip of love ever
reasonable? I think the Almighty took a pretty grave responsibility when
He made men as He did. If I had been He, and understood the forces I was
handling, I would have been too big a coward to do it. There is nothing
for me, Bel, but to move on doing my level best; and if she doesn't
awaken soon, I will try the absent treatment. As sure as you are the
most faithful dog a man ever owned, Bel, I'll try the absent treatment."

The Harvester arose and entered the cabin, stepping softly, for it was
dark in the Girl's room, and he could not hear a sound there. He turned
up the lights in the living-room. As he did so the first thing he saw
was the little trunk. He looked at it intently, then picked up a book.
Every page he turned he glanced again at the trunk. At last he laid
down the book and sat staring, his brain working rapidly. He ended by
carrying the trunk to his room. He darkened the living-room, lighted his
own, drew the rain screens, and piece by piece carefully examined the
contents. There were the pictures, but the name of the photographer had
been removed. There was not a word that would help in identification. He
emptied it to the bottom, and as he picked up the last piece his fingers
struck in a peculiar way that did not give the impression of touching
a solid surface. He felt over it carefully, and when he examined with
a candle he plainly could see where the cloth lining had been cut and
lifted.

For a long time he knelt staring at it, then he deliberately inserted
his knife blade and raised it. The cloth had been glued to a heavy sheet
of pasteboard the exact size of the trunk bottom. Beneath it lay half a
dozen yellow letters, and face down two tissue-wrapped photographs. The
Harvester examined them first. They were of a man close forty, having
a strong, aggressive face, on which pride and dominant will power were
prominently indicated. The other was a reproduction of a dainty and
delicate woman, with exquisitely tender and gentle features. Long the
Harvester studied them. The names of the photographer and the city were
missing. There was nothing except the faces. He could detect traces
of the man in the poise of the Girl and the carriage of her head, and
suggestions of the woman in the refined sweetness of her expression.
Each picture represented wealth in dress and taste in pose. Finally he
laid them together on the table, picked up one of the letters, and read
it. Then he read all of them.

Before he finished, tears were running down his cheeks, and his
resolution was formed. These were the appeals of an adoring mother,
crazed with fear for the safety of an only child, who unfortunately
had fallen under the influence of a man the mother dreaded and feared,
because of her knowledge of life and men of his character. They were one
long, impassioned plea for the daughter not to trust a stranger, not
to believe that vows of passion could be true when all else in life was
false, not to trust her untried judgment of men and the world against
the experience of her parents. But whether the tears that stained those
sheets had fallen from the eyes of the suffering mother or the starved
and deserted daughter, there was no way for the Harvester to know. One
thing was clear: It was not possible for him to rest until he knew if
that woman yet lived and bore such suffering. But every trace of address
had been torn away, and there was nothing to indicate where or in what
circumstances these letters had been written.

A long time the Harvester sat in deep thought. Then he returned all the
letters save one. This with the pictures he made into a packet that he
locked in his desk. The trunk he replaced and then went to bed. Early
the next morning he drove to Onabasha and posted the parcel. The address
it bore was that of the largest detective agency in the country. Then
he bought an interesting book, a box of fruit, and hurried back to the
Girl. He found her on the veranda, Belshazzar stretched close with one
eye shut and the other on his charge, whose cheeks were flushed with
lovely colour as she bent over her drawing material. The Harvester went
to her with a rush, and slipping his fingers under her chin, tilted back
her head against him.

"Got a kiss for me, honey?" he inquired.

"No sir," answered the Girl emphatically. "I gave you a perfectly lovely
one yesterday, and you said it was not right. I am going to try just
once more, and if you say again that it won't do, I'm going back to
Chicago or to my dear Uncle Henry, I haven't decided which."

Her lips were smiling, but her eyes were full of tears.

"Why thank you, Ruth! I think that is wonderful," said the Harvester.
"I'll risk the next one. In the meantime, excuse me if I give you a
demonstration of the real thing, just to furnish you an idea of how it
should be."

The Harvester delivered the sample, and went striding to the marsh. The
dazed Girl sat staring at her work, trying to realize what had happened;
for that was the first time the Harvester had kissed her on the lips,
and it was the material expression a strong man gives the woman he loves
when his heart is surging at high tide. The Girl sat motionless, gazing
at her study.

In the marsh she knew the Harvester was reaping queen-of-the-meadow,
and around the high borders, elecampane and burdock. She could hear his
voice in snatches of song or cheery whistle; notes that she divined
were intended to keep her from worrying. Intermingled with them came the
dog's bark of defiance as he digged for an escaping chipmunk, his note
of pleading when he wanted a root cut with the mattock, his cry of
discovery when he thought he had found something the Harvester would
like, or his yelp of warning when he scented danger. The Girl looked
down the drive to the lake and across at the hedge. Everywhere she saw
glowing colour, with intermittent blue sky and green leaves, all of it a
complete picture, from which nothing could be spared. She turned slowly
and looked toward the marsh, trying to hear the words of the song above
the ripple of Singing Water, and to see the form of the man. Slowly
she lifted her handkerchief and pressed it against her lips, as she
whispered in an awed voice,

"My gracious Heaven, is THAT the kind of a kiss he is expecting me to
give HIM? Why, I couldn't----not to save my life."

She placed her brushes in water, set the colour box on the paper, and
went to the kitchen to prepare the noon lunch. As she worked the soft
colour deepened in her cheeks, a new light glowed in her eyes, and she
hummed over the tune that floated across the marsh. She was very busy
when the Harvester came, but he spoke casually of his morning's work,
ate heartily, and ordered her to take a nap while he washed roots and
filled the trays, and then they went to the woods together for the
afternoon.

In the evening they came home to the cabin and finished the day's
work. As the night was chilly, the Harvester heaped some bark in the
living-room fireplace, and lay on the rug before it, while the Girl sat
in an easy chair and watched him as he talked. He was telling her about
some wonderful combinations he was going to compound for different
ailments and he laughingly asked her if she wanted to be a millionaire's
wife and live in a palace.

"Of course I could if I wanted to!" she suggested.

"You could!" cried the Harvester. "All that is necessary is to combine
a few proper drugs in one great remedy and float it. That is easy! The
people will do the remainder."

"You talk as if you believe that," marvelled the Girl.

"Want it proven?" challenged the Harvester.

"No!" she cried in swift alarm. "What do we want with more than we have?
What is there necessary to happiness that is not ours now? Maybe it is
true that the 'love of money is the root of all evil.' Don't you ever
get a lot just to find out. You said the night I came here that you
didn't want more than you had and now I don't. I won't have it! It
might bring restlessness and discontent. I've seen it make other people
unhappy and separate them. I don't want money, I want work. You make
your remedies and offer them to suffering humanity for just a living
profit, and I'll keep house and draw designs. I am perfectly happy,
free, and unspeakably content. I never dreamed that it was possible for
me to be so glad, and so filled with the joy of life. There is only one
thing on earth I want. If I only could----"

"Could what, Ruth?"

"Could get that kiss right----"

The Harvester laughed.

"Forget it, I tell you!" he commanded. "Just so long as you worry and
fret, so long I've got to wait. If you quit thinking about it, all
'unbeknownst' to yourself you'll awake some morning with it on your
lips. I can see traces of it growing stronger every day. Very soon now
it's going to materialize, and then get out of my way, for I'll be a
whirling, irresponsible lunatic, with the wild joy of it. Oh I've got
faith in that kiss of yours, Ruth! It's on the way. The fates have
booked it. There isn't a reason on earth why I should be served so
scurvy a trick as to miss it, and I never will believe that I shall----"

"David," interrupted the Girl, "go on talking and don't move a muscle,
just reach over presently and fix the fire or something, and then turn
naturally and look at the window beside your door."

"Shall miss it," said the Harvester steadily. "That would be too
unmerciful. What do you see, Ruth?"

"A face. If I am not greatly mistaken, it is my Uncle Henry and he
appears like a perfect fiend. Oh David, I am afraid!"

"Be quiet and don't look," said the Harvester.

He turned and tossed a piece of bark on the fire. Then he reached for
the poker, pushed it down and stirred the coals. He arose as he worked.

"Rise slowly and quietly and go to your room. Stay there until I call
you."

With the Girl out of the way, the Harvester pottered over the fire, and
when the flame leaped he lifted a stick of wood, hesitated as if it were
too small, and laying it down, started to bring a larger one. In the
dining-room he caught a small stick from the wood box, softly stepped
from the door, and ran around the house. But he awakened Belshazzar on
the kitchen floor, and the dog barked and ran after him. By the time the
Harvester reached the corner of his room the man leaped upon a horse and
went racing down the drive. The Harvester flung the stick of wood, but
missed the man and hit the horse. The dog sprang past the Harvester and
vanished. There was the sound and flash of a revolver, and the rattle
of the bridge as the horse crossed it. The dog came back unharmed. The
Harvester ran to the telephone, called the Onabasha police, and asked
them to send a mounted man to meet the intruder before he could reach a
cross road; but they were too slow and missed him. However, the Girl was
certain she had recognized her uncle, and was extremely nervous; but the
Harvester only laughed and told her it was a trip made out of curiosity.
Her uncle wanted to see if he could learn if she were well and happy,
and he finally convinced her that this was the case, although he was not
very sanguine himself.

For the next three days the Harvester worked in the woods and he kept
the Girl with him every minute. By the end of that time he really had
persuaded himself that it was merely curiosity. So through the cooling
fall days they worked together. They were very happy. Before her
wondering eyes the Harvester hung queer branches, burs, nuts, berries,
and trailing vines with curious seed pods. There were masses of
brilliant flowers, most of them strange to the Girl, many to the great
average of humanity. While she sat bending over them, beside her the
Harvester delved in the black earth of the woods, or the clay and sand
of the open hillside, or the muck of the lake shore, and lifted large
bagfuls of roots that he later drenched on the floating raft on the
lake, and when they had drained he dried them. Some of them he did not
wet, but scraped and wiped clean and dry. Often after she was sleeping,
and long before she awoke in the morning, he was at work carry-ing
heaped trays from the evaporator to the store-room, and tying the roots,
leaves, bark, and seeds into packages.

While he gathered trillium roots the Girl made drawings of the plant
and learned its commercial value. She drew lady's slipper and Solomon's
seal, and learned their uses and prices; and carefully traced wild
ginger leaves while nibbling the aromatic root. It was difficult to keep
from protesting when the work carried them around the lake shore and
to the pokeberry beds, for the colour of these she loved. It required
careful explanation as to the value of the roots and seeds as blood
purifier, and the argument that in a few more days the frost would level
the bed, to induce her to consent to its harvesting. But when the
case was properly presented, she put aside her drawing and stained her
slender fingers gathering the seeds, and loved the work.

The sun was golden on the lake, the birds of the upland were clustering
over reeds and rushes, for the sake of plentiful seed and convenient
water. Many of them sang fitfully, the notes of almost all of them were
melodious, and the day was a long, happy dream. There was but little
left to gather until ginseng time. For that the Harvester had engaged
several boys to help him, for the task of digging the roots, washing and
drying them, burying part of the seeds and preparing the remainder
for market seemed endless for one man to attempt. After a full day the
Harvester lay before the fire, and his head was so close the Girl's knee
that her fingers were in reach of his hair. Every time he mended the
fire he moved a little, until he could feel the touch of her garments
against him. Then he began to plan for the winter; how they would store
food for the long, cold days, how much fuel would be required, when they
would go to the city for their winter clothing, what they would read,
and how they would work together at the drawings.

"I am almost too anxious to wait longer to get back to my carving," he
said. "Whoever would have thought this spring that fall would come
and find the birds talking of going, the caterpillars spinning winter
quarters, the animals holing up, me getting ready for the cold, and your
candlesticks not finished. Winter is when you really need them. Then
there is solid cheer in numbers of candles and a roaring wood fire. The
furnace is going to be a good thing to keep the floors and the bathroom
warm, but an open fire of dry, crackling wood is the only rational
source of heat in a home. You must watch for the fairy dances on the
backwall, Ruth, and learn to trace goblin faces in the coals. Sometimes
there is a panorama of temples and trees, and you will find exquisite
colour in the smoke. Dry maple makes a lovely lavender, soft and fine as
a floating veil, and damp elm makes a blue, and hickory red and yellow.
I almost can tell which wood is burning after the bark is gone, by the
smoke and flame colour. When the little red fire fairies come out and
dance on the backwall it is fun to figure what they are celebrating. By
the way, Ruth, I have been a lamb for days. I hope you have observed!
But I would sleep a little sounder to-night if you only could give me a
hint whether that kiss is coming on at all."

He tipped back his head to see her face, and it was glorious in the red
firelight; the big eyes never appeared so deep and dark. The tilted head
struck her hand, and her fingers ran through his hair.

"You said to forget it," she reminded him, "and then it would come
sooner."

"Which same translated means that it is not here yet. Well, I didn't
expect it, so I am not disappointed; but begorry, I do wish it would
materialize by Christmas. I think I will work for that. Wouldn't it make
a day worth while, though? By the way, what do you want for Christmas,
Ruth?"

"A doll," she answered.

The Harvester laughed. He tipped his head again to see her face and
suddenly grew quiet, for it was very serious.

"I am quite in earnest," she said. "I think the big dolls in the stores
are beautiful, and I never owned only a teeny little one. All my life
I've wanted a big doll as badly as I ever longed for anything that was
not absolutely necessary to keep me alive. In fact, a doll is essential
to a happy childhood. The mother instinct is so ingrained in a girl that
if she doesn't have dolls to love, even as a baby, she is deprived of a
part of her natural rights. It's a pitiful thing to have been the little
girl in the picture who stands outside the window and gazes with longing
soul at the doll she is anxious to own and can't ever have. Harvester,
I was always that little girl. I am quite in earnest. I want a big,
beautiful doll more than anything else."

As she talked the Girl's fingers were idly threading the Harvester's
hair. His head lightly touched her knee, and she shifted her position
to afford him a comfortable resting place. With a thrill of delight that
shook him, the man laid his head in her lap and looked into the fire,
his face glowing as a happy boy's.

"You shall have the loveliest doll that money can buy, Ruth," he
promised. "What else do you want?"

"A roasted goose, plum pudding, and all those horrid indigestible things
that Christmas stories always tell about; and popcorn balls, and candy,
and everything I've always wanted and never had, and a long beautiful
day with you. That's all!"

"Ruth, I'm so happy I almost wish I could go to Heaven right now before
anything occurs to spoil this," said the Harvester.

The wheels of a car rattled across the bridge. He whirled to his knees,
and put his arms around the Girl.

"Ruth," he said huskily. "I'll wager a thousand dollars I know what is
coming. Hug me tight, quick! and give me the best kiss you can----any
old kind of a one, so you touch my lips with yours before I've got to
open that door and let in trouble."

The Girl threw her arms around his neck and with the imprint of her lips
warm on his the Harvester crossed the room, and his heart dropped from
the heights with a thud. He stepped out, closing the door behind him,
and crossing the veranda, passed down the walk. He recognized the car
as belonging to a garage in Onabasha, and in it sat two men, one of whom
spoke.

"Are you David Langston?"

"Yes," said the Harvester.

"Did you send a couple of photographs to a New York detective agency a
few days ago with inquiries concerning some parties you wanted located?"

"I did," said the Harvester. "But I was not expecting any such immediate
returns."

"Your questions touched on a case that long has been in the hands of the
agency, and they telegraphed the parties. The following day the people
had a letter, giving them the information they required, from another
source."

"That is where Uncle Henry showed his fine Spencerian hand," commented
the Harvester. "It always will be a great satisfaction that I got my
fist in first."

"Is Miss Jameson here?"

"No," said the Harvester. "My wife is at home. Her surname was Ruth
Jameson, but we have been married since June. Did you wish to speak with
Mrs. Langston?"

"I came for that purpose. My name is Kennedy. I am the law partner and
the closest friend of the young lady's grandfather. News of her location
has prostrated her grandmother so that he could not leave her, and I was
sent to bring the young woman."

"Oh!" said the Harvester. "Well you will have to interview her about
that. One word first. She does not know that I sent those pictures and
made that inquiry. One other word. She is just recovering from a case of
fever, induced by wrong conditions of life before I met her. She is not
so strong as she appears. Understand you are not to be abrupt. Go very
gently! Her feelings and health must be guarded with extreme care."

The Harvester opened the door, and as she saw the stranger, the Girl's
eyes widened, and she arose and stood waiting.

"Ruth," said the Harvester, "this is a man who has been making quite a
search for you, and at last he has you located."

The Harvester went to the Girl's side, and put a reinforcing arm around
her.

"Perhaps he brings you some news that will make life most interesting
and very lovely for you. Will you shake hands with Mr. Kennedy?"

The Girl suddenly straightened to unusual height.

"I will hear why he has been making 'quite a search for me,' and on
whose authority he has me 'located,' first," she said.

A diabolical grin crossed the face of the Harvester, and he took heart.

"Then please be seated, Mr. Kennedy," he said, "and we will talk over
the matter. As I understand, you are a representative of my wife's
people."

The Girl stared at the Harvester.

"Take your chair, Ruth, and meet this as a matter of course," he
advised casually. "You always have known that some day it must come.
You couldn't look in the face of those photographs of your mother in her
youth and not realize that somewhere hearts were aching and breaking,
and brains were busy in a search for her."

The Girl stood rigid.

"I want it distinctly understood," she said, "that I have no use on
earth for my mother's people. They come too late. I absolutely refuse to
see or to hold any communication with them."

"But young lady, that is very arbitrary!" cried Mr. Kennedy. "You don't
understand! They are a couple of old people, and they are slowly dying
of broken hearts!"

"Not so badly broken or they wouldn't die slowly," commented the Girl
grimly. "The heart that was really broken was my mother's. The torture
of a starved, overworked body and hopeless brain was hers. There was
nothing slow about her death, for she went out with only half a life
spent, and much of that in acute agony, because of their negligence.
David, you often have said that this is my home. I choose to take you at
your word. Will you kindly tell this man that he is not welcome in this
house, and I wish him to leave it at once?"

The Harvester stepped back, and his face grew very white.

"I can't, Ruth," he said gently.

"Why not?"

"Because I brought him here."

"You brought him here! You! David, are you crazy? You!"

"It is through me that he came."

The Girl caught the mantel for support.

"Then I stand alone again," she said. "Harvester, I had thought you were
on my side."

"I am at your feet," said the man in a broken voice. "Ruth dear, will
you let me explain?"

"There is only one explanation, and with what you have done for me fresh
in my mind, I can't put it into words."

"Ruth, hear me!"

"I must! You force me! But before you speak understand this: Not now, or
through all eternity, do I forgive the inexcusable neglect that drove my
mother to what I witnessed and was helpless to avert."

"My dear! My dear!" said the Harvester, "I had hoped the woods had done
a more perfect work in your heart. Your mother is lying in state now,
Girl, safe from further suffering of any kind; and if I read aright, her
tired face and shrivelled frame were eloquent of forgiveness. Ruth dear,
if she so loved them that her heart was broken and she died for them,
think what they are suffering! Have some mercy on them."

"Get this very clear, David," said the Girl. "She died of hunger
for food. Her heart was not so broken that she couldn't have lived a
lifetime, and got much comfort out of it, if her body had not lacked
sustenance. Oh I was so happy a minute ago. David, why did you do this
thing?"

The Harvester picked up the Girl, placed her in a chair, and knelt
beside her with his arms around her.

"Because of the PAIN IN THE WORLD, Ruth," he said simply. "Your mother
is sleeping sweetly in the long sleep that knows neither anger nor
resentment; and so I was forced to think of a gentle-faced, little
old mother whose heart is daily one long ache, whose eyes are dim with
tears, and a proud, broken old man who spends his time trying to comfort
her, when his life is as desolate as hers."

"How do you know so wonderfully much about their aches and broken
hearts?"

"Because I have seen their faces when they were happy, Ruth, and so I
know what suffering would do to them. There were pictures of them and
letters in the bottom of that old trunk. I searched it the other night
and found them; and by what life has done to your mother and to you, I
can judge what it is now bringing them. Never can you be truly happy,
Ruth, until you have forgiven them, and done what you can to comfort the
remainder of their lives. I did it because of the pain in the world, my
girl."

"What about my pain?"

"The only way on earth to cure it is through forgiveness. That, and that
only, will ease it all away, and leave you happy and free for life and
love. So long as you let this rancour eat in your heart, Ruth, you are
not, and never can be, normal. You must forgive them, dear, hear what
they have to say, and give them the comfort of seeing what they can
discover of her in you. Then your heart will be at rest at last, your
soul free, you can take your rightful place in life, and the love
you crave will awaken in your heart. Ruth, dear you are the acme of
gentleness and justice. Be just and gentle now! Give them their chance!
My heart aches, and always will ache for the pain you have known, but
nursing and brooding over it will not cure it. It is going to take a
heroic operation to cut it out, and I chose to be the surgeon. You have
said that I once saved your body from pain Ruth, trust me now to free
your soul."

"What do you want?"

"I want you to speak kindly to this man, who through my act has come
here, and allow him to tell you why he came. Then I want you to do the
kind and womanly thing your duty suggests that you should."

"David, I don t understand you!"

"That is no difference," said the Harvester. "The point is, do you TRUST
me?"

The Girl hesitated. "Of course I do," she said at last.

"Then hear what your grandfather's friend has come to say for him, and
forget yourself in doing to others as you would have them----really,
Ruth, that is all of religion or of life worth while. Go on, Mr.
Kennedy."

The Harvester drew up a chair, seated himself beside the Girl, and
taking one of her hands, he held it closely and waited.

"I was sent here by my law partner and my closest friend, Mr. Alexander
Herron, of Philadelphia," said the stranger. "Both he and Mrs. Herron
were bitterly opposed to your mother's marriage, because they knew life
and human nature, and there never is but one end to men such as she
married."

"You may omit that," said the Girl coldly. "Simply state why you are
here."

"In response to an inquiry from your husband concerning the originals
of some photographs he sent to a detective agency in New York. They have
had the case for years, and recognizing the pictures as a clue, they
telegraphed Mr. Herron. The prospect of news after years of fruitless
searching so prostrated Mrs. Herron that he dared not leave her, and he
sent me."

"Kindly tell me this," said the Girl. "Where were my mother's father and
mother for the four years immediately following her marriage?"

"They went to Europe to avoid the humiliation of meeting their friends.
There, in Italy, Mrs. Herron developed a fever, and it was several years
before she could be brought home. She retired from society, and has been
confined to her room ever since. When they could return, a search was
instituted at once for their daughter, but they never have been able to
find a trace. They have hunted through every eastern city they thought
might contain her."

"And overlooked a little insignificant place like Chicago, of course."

"I myself conducted a personal search there, and visited the home of
every Jameson in the directory or who had mail at the office or of whom
I could get a clue of any sort."

"I don't suppose two women in a little garret room would be in the
directory, and there never was any mail."

"Did your mother ever appeal to her parents?"

"She did," said the Girl. "She admitted that she had been wrong, asked
their forgiveness, and begged to go home. That was in the second year of
her marriage, and she was in Cleveland. Afterward she went to Chicago,
from there she wrote again."

"Her father and mother were in Italy fighting for the mother's life,
two years after that. It is very easy to become lost in a large city.
Criminals do it every day and are never found, even with the best
detectives on their trail. I am very sorry about this. My friends will
be broken-hearted. At any time they would have been more than delighted
to have had their daughter return. A letter on the day following the
message from the agency brought news that she was dead, and now their
only hope for any small happiness at the close of years of suffering
lies with you. I was sent to plead with you to return with me at once
and make them a visit. Of course, their home is yours. You are their
only heir, and they would be very happy if you were free, and would
remain permanently with them."

"How do they know I will not be like the father they so detested?"

"They had sufficient cause to dislike him. They have every reason to
love and welcome you. They are consumed with anxiety. Will you come?"

"No. This is for me to decide. I do not care for them or their property.
Always they have failed me when my distress was unspeakable. Now there
is only one thing I ask of life, more than my husband has given me, and
if that lay in his power I would have it. You may go back and tell them
that I am perfectly happy. I have everything I need. They can give me
nothing I want, not even their love. Perhaps, sometime, I will go to see
them for a few days, if David will go with me."

"Young woman, do you realize that you are issuing a death sentence?"
asked the lawyer gently.

"It is a just one."

"I do not believe your husband agrees with you. I know I do not. Mrs.
Herron is a tiny old lady, with a feeble spark of vitality left; and
with all her strength she is clinging to life, and pleading with it to
give her word of her only child before she goes out unsatisfied. She
knows that her daughter is gone, and now her hopes are fastened on you.
If for only a few days, you certainly must go with me."

"I will not!"

The lawyer turned to the Harvester.

"She will be ready to start with you to-morrow morning, on the first
train north," said the Harvester. "We will meet you at the station at
eight."

"I----I am afraid I forgot to tell my driver to wait."

"You mean your instructions were not to let the Girl out of your sight,"
said the Harvester. "Very well! We have comfortable rooms. I will show
you to one. Please come this way."

The Harvester led the guest to the lake room and arranged for the night.
Then he went to the telephone and sent a message to an address he had
been furnished, asking for an immediate reply. It went to Philadelphia
and contained a description of the lawyer, and asked if he had been
sent by Mr. Herron to escort his grand-daughter to his home. When the
Harvester returned to the living-room the Girl, white and defiant,
waited before the fire. He knelt beside her and put his arms around her,
but she repulsed him; so he sat on the rug and looked at her.

"No wonder you felt sure you knew what that was!" she cried bitterly.

"Ruth, if you will allow me to lift the bottom of that old trunk, and if
you will read any one of the half dozen letters I read, you will forgive
me, and begin making preparations to go."

"It's a wonder you don't hold them before me and force me to read them,"
she said.

"Don't say anything you will be sorry for after you are gone, dear."

"I'm not going!"

"Oh yes you are!"

"Why?"

"Because it is right that you should, and right is inexorable. Also,
because I very much wish you to; you will do it for me."

"Why do you want me to go?"

"I have three strong reasons: First, as I told you, it is the only thing
that will cleanse your heart of bitterness and leave it free for the
tenanting of a great and holy love. Next, I think they honestly made
every effort to find your mother, and are now growing old in despair you
can lighten, and you owe it to them and yourself to do it. Lastly, for
my sake. I've tried everything I know, Ruth, and I can't make you love
me, or bring you to a realizing sense of it if you do. So before I saw
that chest I had planned to harvest my big crop, and try with all my
heart while I did it, and if love hadn't come then, I meant to get
some one to stay with you, and I was going away to give you a free
perspective for a time. I meant to plead that I needed a few weeks with
a famous chemist I know to prepare me better for my work. My real motive
was to leave you, and let you see if absence could do anything for me in
your heart. You've been very nearly the creature of my hands for months,
my girl; whatever any one else may do, you're bound to miss me mightily,
and I figured that with me away, perhaps you could solve the problem
alone I seem to fail in helping you with. This is only a slight change
of plans. You are going in my stead. I will harvest the ginseng and
cure it, and then, if you are not at home, and the loneliness grows
unbearable, I will take the chemistry course, until you decide when you
will come, if ever."

"'If ever?'"

"Yes," said the Harvester. "I am growing accustomed to facing big
propositions----I will not dodge this. The faces of the three of your
people I have seen prove refinement. Their clothing indicates wealth.
These long, lonely years mean that they will shower you with every
outpouring of loving, hungry hearts. They will keep you if they can, my
dear. I do not blame them. The life I propose for you is one of work,
mostly for others, and the reward, in great part, consists of the joy in
the soul of the creator of things that help in the world. I realize that
you will find wealth, luxury, and lavish love. I know that I may lose
you forever, and if it is right and best for you, I hope I will. I know
exactly what I am risking, but I yet say, go."

"I don't see how you can, and love me as you prove you do."

"That is a little streak of the inevitableness of nature that the forest
has ground into my soul. I'd rather cut off my right hand than take
yours with it, in the parting that will come in the morning; but you are
going, and I am sending you. So long as I am shaped like a human being,
it is in me to dignify the possession of a vertical spine by acting as
nearly like a man as I know how. I insist that you are my wife, because
it crucifies me to think otherwise. I tell you to-night, Ruth, you are
not and never have been. You are free as air. You married me without any
love for me in your heart, and you pretended none. It was all my doing.
If I find that I was wrong, I will free you without a thought of results
to me. I am a secondary proposition. I thought then that you were alone
and helpless, and before the Almighty, I did the best I could. But I
know now that you are entitled to the love of relatives, wealth, and
high social position, no doubt. If I allowed the passion in my heart
to triumph over the reason of my brain, and worked on your feelings and
tied you to the woods, without knowing but that you might greatly prefer
that other life you do not know, but to which you are entitled, I would
go out and sink myself in Loon Lake."

"David, I love you. I do not want to go. Please, please let me remain
with you."

"Not if you could say that realizing what it means, and give me the kiss
right now I would stake my soul to win! Not by any bribe you can think
of or any allurement you can offer. It is right that you go to those
suffering old people. It is right you know what you are refusing for me,
before you renounce it. It is right you take the position to which you
are entitled, until you understand thoroughly whether this suits you
better. When you know that life as well as this, the people you will
meet as intimately as me, then you can decide for all time, and I can
look you in the face with honest, unwavering eye; and if by any chance
your heart is in the woods, and you prefer me and the cabin to what they
have to offer----to all eternity your place here is vacant, Ruth. My
love is waiting for you; and if you come under those conditions, I never
can have any regret. A clear conscience is worth restraining passion a
few months to gain, and besides, I always have got the fact to face that
when you say 'I love,' and when I say 'I love,' it means two entirely
different things. When you realize that the love of man for woman, and
woman for man, is a thing that floods the heart, brain, soul, and body
with a wonderful and all-pervading ecstasy, and if I happen to be the
man who makes you realize it, then come tell me, and we will show
God and His holy angels what earth means by the Heaven inspired word,
'radiance.'"

"David, there never will be any other man like you."

"The exigencies of life must develop many a finer and better."

"You still refuse me? You yet believe I do not love you?"

"Not with the love I ask, my girl. But if I did not believe it was
germinating in your heart, and that it would come pouring over me in a
torrent some glad day, I doubt if I could allow you to go, Ruth! I am
like any other man in selfishness and in the passions of the body."

"Selfishness! You haven't an idea what it means," said the Girl. "And
what you call love----there I haven't. But I know how to appreciate you,
and you may be positively sure that it will be only a few days until I
will come back to you."

"But I don't want you until you can bring the love I crave. I am sending
you to remain until that time, Ruth."

"But it may be months, Man!"

"Then stay months."

"But it may be----"

"It may be never! Then remain forever. That will be proof positive that
your happiness does not lie in my hands."

"Why should I not consider you as you do me?"

"Because I love you, and you do not love me."

"You are cruel to yourself and to me. You talk about the pain in the
world. What about the pain in my heart right now? And if I know you in
the least, one degree more would make you cry aloud for mercy. Oh David,
are we of no consideration at all?"

The muscles of the Harvester's face twisted an instant.

"This is where we lop off the small branches to grow perfect fruit
later. This is where we do evil that good may result. This is where
we suffer to-night in order we may appreciate fully the joy of love's
dawning. If I am causing you pain, forgive me, dear heart. I would give
my life to prevent it, but I am powerless. It is right! We cannot avoid
doing it, if we ever would be happy."

He picked up the Girl, and held her crushed in his arms a long time.
Then he set her inside her door and said, "Lay out what you want to take
and I will help you pack, so that you can get some sleep. We must be
ready early in the morning."

When the clothing to be worn was selected, the new trunk packed, and all
arrangements made, the Girl sat in his arms before the fire as he had
held her when she was ill, and then he sent her to bed and went to
the lake shore to fight it out alone. Only God and the stars and the
faithful Belshazzar saw the agony of a strong man in his extremity.

Near dawn he heard the tinkle of the bell and went to receive his
message and order a car for morning. Then he returned to the merciful
darkness of night, and paced the driveway until light came peeping over
the tree tops. He prepared breakfast and an hour later put the Girl on
the train, and stood watching it until the last rift of smoke curled
above the spires of the city.



CHAPTER XX. THE MAN IN THE BACKGROUND

Then the Harvester returned to Medicine Woods to fight his battle alone.
At first the pain seemed unendurable, but work always had been his
panacea, it was his salvation now. He went through the cabin, folding
bedding and storing it in closets, rolling rugs sprinkled with powdered
alum, packing cushions, and taking window seats from the light.

"Our sleeping room and the kitchen will serve for us, Bel," he said. "We
will put all these other things away carefully, so they will be as good
as new when the Girl comes home."

The evening of the second day he was called to the telephone.

"There is a telegram for you," said a voice. "A message from
Philadelphia. It reads: 'Arrived safely. Thank you for making me come.
Dear old people. Will write soon. With love, Ruth.'

"Have you got it?"

"No," lied the Harvester, grinning rapturously. "Repeat it again slowly,
and give me time after each sentence to write it. Now! Go on!"

He carried the message to the back steps and sat reading it again and
again.

"I supposed I'd have to wait at least four days," he said to Ajax as the
bird circled before him. "This is from the Girl, old man, and she is
not forgetting us to begin with, anyway. She is there all safe, she sees
that they need her, they are lovable old people, she is going to write
us all about it soon, and she loves us all she knows how to love any
one. That should be enough to keep us sane and sensible until her letter
comes. There is no use to borrow trouble, so we will say everything in
the world is right with us, and be as happy as we can on that until we
find something we cannot avoid worrying over. In the meantime, we will
have faith to believe that we have suffered our share, and the end will
be happy for all of us. I am mighty glad the Girl has a home, and the
right kind of people to care for her. Now, when she comes back to me, I
needn't feel that she was forced, whether she wanted to or not, because
she had nowhere to go. This will let me out with a clean conscience, and
that is the only thing on earth that allows a man to live in peace with
himself. Now I'll go finish everything else, and then I'll begin the
ginseng harvest."

So the Harvester hitched Betsy and with Belshazzar at his feet he drove
through the woods to the sarsaparilla beds. He noticed the beautiful
lobed leaves, at which the rabbits had been nibbling, and the heads of
lustrous purple-black berries as he began digging the roots that he sold
for stimulants.

"I might have needed a dose of you now myself," the Harvester addressed
a heap of uprooted plants, "if the electric wires hadn't brought me a
better. Great invention that! Never before realized it fully! I thought
to-day would be black as night, but that message changes the complexion
of affairs mightily. So I'll dig you for people who really are in need
of something to brace them up."

After the sarsaparilla was on the trays, he attacked the beds of Indian
hemp, with its long graceful pods, and took his usual supply. Then he
worked diligently on the warm hillside over the dandelion. When these
were finished he brought half a dozen young men from the city and
drilled them on handling ginseng. He was warm, dirty, and tired when he
came from the beds the evening of the fourth day. He finished his work
at the barn, prepared and ate his supper, slipped into clean clothing,
and walked to the country road where it crossed the lane. There he
opened his mail box. The letter he expected with the Philadelphia
postmark was inside. He carried it to the bridge, and sitting in her
favourite place, with the lake breeze threading his hair, opened his
first letter from the Girl.

"My dear Friend, Lover, Husband," it began.

The Harvester turned the sheets face down across his knee, laid his hand
on them, and stared meditatively at the lake. "'Friend,'" he commented.
"Well, that's all right! I am her friend, as well as I know how to be.
'Lover.' I come in there, full force. I did my level best on that score,
though I can't boast myself a howling success; a man can't do more
than he knows, and if I had been familiar with all the wiles of expert,
professional love-makers, they wouldn't have availed me in the Girl's
condition. I had a mighty peculiar case to handle in her, and not a
particle of training. But if she says 'Lover,' I must have made some
kind of a showing on the job. 'Husband.'" A slow flush crept up the
brawny neck and tinged the bronzed face. "That's a good word," said
the Harvester, "and it must mean a wonderful thing----to some men. 'Who
bides his time.' Well, I'm 'biding,' and if my time ever comes to be my
Dream Girl's husband, I'll wager all I'm worth on one thing. I'll study
the job from every point of the compass, and I'll see what showing I can
make on being the kind of a husband that a woman clings to and loves at
eighty."

Taking a deep breath the Harvester lifted the letter, and laying one
hand on Belshazzar's head, he proceeded----"I might as well admit in the
beginning that I cried most of the way here. Some of it was because I
was nervous and dreaded the people I would meet, and more on account of
what I felt toward them, but most of it was because I did not want to
leave you. I have been spoiled dreadfully! You have taught me so to
depend on you----and for once I feel that I really can claim to have
been an apt pupil----that it was like having the heart torn out of me to
come. I want you to know this, because it will teach you that I have
a little bit of appreciation of how good you are to me, and to all the
world as well. I am glad that I almost cried myself sick over leaving
you. I wish now I just had stood up in the car, and roared like a burned
baby.

"But all the tears I shed in fear of grandfather and grandmother were
wasted. They are a couple of dear old people, and it would have been a
crime to allow them to suffer more than they must of necessity. It all
seems so different when they talk; and when I see the home, luxuries,
and friends my mother had, it appears utterly incomprehensible that she
dared leave them for a stranger. Probably the reason she did was because
she was grandfather's daughter. He is gentle and tender some of the
time, but when anything irritates him, and something does every few
minutes, he breaks loose, and such another explosion you never heard. It
does not mean a thing, and it seems to lower his tension enough to keep
him from bursting with palpitation of the heart or something, but it is
a strain for others. At first it frightened me dreadfully. Grandmother
is so tiny and frail, so white in her big bed, and when he is the very
worst, and she only smiles at him, why I know he does not mean it at
all. But, David, I hope you never will get an idea that this would be
a pleasant way for you to act, because it would not, and I never would
have the courage to offer you the love I have come to find if you
slammed a cane and yelled, 'demnation,' at me. Grandmother says she does
not mind at all, but I wonder if she did not acquire the habit of lying
in bed because it is easier to endure in a prostrate position.

"The house is so big I get lost, and I do not know yet which are
servants and which friends; and there is a steady stream of seamstresses
and milliners making things for me. Grandmother and father both think I
will be quite passable in appearance when I am what they call 'modishly
dressed.' I think grandmother will forget herself some day and leave her
bed before she knows it, in her eagerness to see how something appears.
I could not begin to tell you about all the lovely things to wear, for
every occasion under the sun, and they say these are only temporary,
until some can be made especially for me.

"They divide the time in sections, and there is an hour to drive, I am
to have a horse and ride later, and a time to shop, so long to visit
grandmother, and set hours to sleep, dress, to be fitted, taken to see
things, music lessons, and a dancing teacher. I think a longer day will
have to be provided.

"I do not care anything about dancing. I know what would make me dance
nicely enough for anything, but I am going to try the music, and see if
I can learn just a few little songs and some old melodies for evening,
when the work is done, the fire burns low, and you are resting on the
rug. There is enough room for a piano between your door and the south
wall and that corner seems vacant anyway. You would like it, David, I
know, if I could play and sing just enough to put you to sleep nicely.
It is in the back of my head that I will try to do every single thing,
just as they want me to, and that will make them happy, but never forget
that the instant I feel in my soul that your kiss is right on my lips,
I am coming to you by lightning express; and I told them so the first
thing, and that I only came because you made me.

"They did not raise an objection, but I am not so dull that I cannot see
they are trying to bind me to them from the very first with chains too
strong to break. We had just one little clash. Grandfather was mightily
pleased over what you told Mr. Kennedy about my never having been your
wife, and that I was really free. There seems to be a man, the son
of his partner, whom grandfather dearly loves, and he wants me to
be friends with his friend. One can see at once what he is planning,
because he said he was going to introduce me as Miss Jameson. I told
him that would be creating a false impression, because I was a married
woman; but he only laughed at me and went straight to doing it.

"Of course, I know why, but he is so terribly set I cannot stop him, so
I shall have to tell people myself that I am a staid, old married lady.
After all, I suppose I might as well let him go, if it pleases him. I
shall know how to protect myself and any one else, from any mistakes
concerning me; and in my heart I know what I know, and what I cannot
make you believe, but I will some day.

"I suspect you're harvesting the ginseng now. The roar and rush of the
city seem strange, as if I never had heard it before, and I feel so
crowded. I scarcely can sleep at night for the clamour of the cars,
cabs, and throbbing life. Grandfather will not hear a word, and he just
sputters and says 'demnation' when I try to tell him about you; but
grandmother will listen, and I talk to her of you and Medicine Woods by
the hour. She says she thinks you must be a wonderfully nice person. I
haven't dared tell her yet the thing that will win her. She is so little
and frail, and she has heart trouble so badly; but some day I shall
tell her all about Chicago that I can, and then of Uncle Henry, and then
about you and the oak, and that will make her love you as I do. There
are so many things to do; they have sent for me three times. I shall
tell them they must put you on the schedule, and give me so much time to
write or I will upset the whole programme.

"I think you will like to know that Mr. Kennedy told grandfather all you
said to him about my illness, for almost as soon as I came he brought
a very wonderful man to my room, and he asked many questions and I
told him all about it, and what I had been doing. He made out a list of
things to eat and exercises. I am being taken care of just as you did,
so I will go on growing well and strong. The trouble is they are too
good to me. I would just love to shuffle my feet in dead leaves, and lie
on the grass this morning. I never got my swim in the lake. I will have
to save that until next summer. He also told grandfather what you said
about Uncle Henry, and I think he was pleased that you tried to find him
as soon as you knew. He let me see the letter Uncle Henry wrote, and it
was a vile thing----just such as he would write. It asked how much he
would be willing to pay for information concerning his heir. I told
grandfather all about it, and I saw the answer he wrote. I told him some
things to say, and one of them was that the honesty of a man without
a price prevented the necessity of anything being paid to find me. The
other was that you located my people yourself, and at once sent me to
them against my wishes. I was determined he should know that. So Uncle
Henry missed his revenge on you. He evidently thought he not only would
hurt you by breaking up your home and separating us, but also he would
get a reward for his work. He wrote some untrue things about you, and I
wish he hadn't, for grandfather can think of enough himself. But I will
soon change that. Please, please take good care of all my things, my
flowers and vines, and most of all tell Belshazzar to protect you with
his life. And you be very good to my dear, dear lover. I will write
again soon, Ruth."

When the Harvester had studied the letter until he could repeat
it backward, he went to the cabin and answered it. Then he sent
subscriptions for two of Philadelphia's big dailies, and harvested
ginseng from dawn until black darkness. Never was such a crop grown in
America. The beds had been made in the original home of the plant, so
that it throve under perfectly natural conditions in the forest, but
here and there branches had been thinned above, and nature helped by
science below. This resulted in thick, pulpy roots of astonishing size
and weight. As the Harvester lifted them he bent the tops and buried
part of the seed for another crop. For weeks he worked over the bed.
Then the last load went down the hill to the dry-house and the helpers
were paid. Next the fall work was finished. Fuel and food were stored
for winter, while the cold crept from the lake, swept down the hill and
surrounded the cabin.

The Harvester finished long days in the dry-house and store-room, and
after supper he sat by the fire reading over the Girl's letters, carving
on her candlesticks, or in the work room, bending above the boards he
was shaving and polishing for a gift he had planned for her Christmas.
The Careys had him in their home for Thanksgiving. He told them all
about sending the Girl away himself, read them some of her letters, and
they talked with perfect confidence of how soon she would come home.
The Harvester tried to think confidently, but as the days went by the
letters became fewer, always with the excuse that there was no time to
write, but with loving assurance that she was thinking of him and would
do better soon.

However they came often enough that he had something new to tell his
friends so that they did not suspect that waiting was a trial to him. A
few days after Thanksgiving the gift that he had planned was finished.
It was a big, burl-maple box, designed after the hope chests that he saw
advertised in magazines. The wood was rare, cut in heavy slabs, polished
inside and out, dove-tailed corners with ornate brass bindings, hinges
and lock, and hand-carved feet. On the inside of the lid cut on a brass
plate was the inscription, "Ruth Langston, Christmas of Nineteen Hundred
and Ten. David."

Then he began packing the chest. He put in the finished candlesticks
and a box of candleberry dips he had made of delightfully spiced wax,
 pale green. He ordered the doll weeks before from the largest
store in Onabasha, and the dealer brought on several that he might make
a selection. He chose a large baby doll almost life size, and sent it
to the dress-making department to be completely and exquisitely clothed.
Long before the day he was picking kernels to glaze from nuts, drying
corn to pop, and planning candies to be made of maple sugar. When he
figured it was time to start the box, he worked carefully, filling
spaces with chestnut and hazel burs, and finishing the tops of
boxes with gaudy red and yellow leaves he had kept in their original
brightness by packing them in sand. He put in scarlet berries of
mountain ash and long twining sprays of yellow and red bitter-sweet
berries, for her room. Then he carefully covered the chest with cloth,
packed it in an outside box, and sent it to the Girl by express. As he
came from the train shed, where he had helped with loading, he met Henry
Jameson. Instantly the long arm of the Harvester shot out, and in a grip
that could not be broken he caught the man by the back of the neck and
proceeded to dangle him. As he did so he roared with laughter.

"Dear Uncle Henry!" he cried. "How did you feel when you got your letter
from Philadelphia? Wasn't it a crime that an honest man, which same
refers to me, beat you? Didn't you gnash your teeth when you learned
that instead of separating me from my wife I had found her people and
sent her to them myself? Didn't it rend your soul to miss your little
revenge and fail to get the good, fat reward you confidently expected?
Ho! Ho! Thus are lofty souls downcast. I pity you, Henry Jameson, but
not so much that I won't break your back if you meddle in my affairs
again, and I am taking this opportunity to tell you so. Here you go out
of my life, for if you appear in it once more I will finish you like a
copperhead. Understand?"

With a last shake the Harvester dropped him, and went into the express
office, where several men had watched the proceedings.

"Been dipping in your affairs, has he?" asked the expressman.

"Trying it," laughed the Harvester.

"Well he is just moving to Idaho, and you probably won't be bothered
with him any more."

"Good news!" said the Harvester. He felt much relieved as he went back
to Betsy and drove to Medicine Woods.

The Careys had invited him, but he chose to spend Christmas alone. He
had finished breakfast when the telephone bell rang, and the expressman
told him there was a package for him from Philadelphia. The Harvester
mounted Betsy and rode to the city at once. The package was so very
small he slipped it into his pocket, and went to the doctor's to say
Merry Christmas! To Mrs. Carey he gave a pretty lavender silk dress, and
to the doctor a new watch chain. Then he went to the hospital, where
he left with Molly a set of china dishes from the Girl, and a fur-lined
great coat, his gift to Doctor Harmon. He rode home and stabled Betsy,
giving her an extra quart of oats, and going into the house he sat by
the kitchen fire and opened the package.

In a nest of cotton lay a tissue-wrapped velvet box, and inside that, in
a leather pocket case, an ivory miniature of the Girl by an artist who
knew how to reproduce life. It was an exquisite picture, and a face
of wonderful beauty. He looked at it for a long time, and then called
Belshazzar and carried it out to show Ajax. Then he put it into his
breast pocket squarely over his heart, but he wore the case shiny the
first day taking it out. Before noon he went to the mail box and found
a long letter from the Girl, full of life, health, happiness, and with
steady assurances of love for him, but there was no mention made of
coming home.

She seemed engrossed in the music lessons, riding, dancing, pretty
clothing, splendid balls, receptions, and parties of all kinds. The
Harvester answered it with his heart full of love for her, and then
waited. It was a long week before the reply came, and then it was short
on account of so many things that must be done, but she insisted that
she was well, happy, and having a fine time. After that the letters
became less frequent and shorter. At times there would be stretches of
almost two weeks with not a line, and then only short notes to explain
that she was too busy to write.

Through the dreary, cold days of January and February the Harvester
invented work in the store-room, in the workshop, at the candlesticks,
sat long over great books, and spent hours in the little laboratory
preparing and compounding drugs. In the evenings he carved and read.
First of all he scanned the society columns of the papers he was taking,
and almost every day he found the name of Miss Ruth Jameson, often
a paragraph describing her dress and her beauty of face and charm of
manner; and constantly the name of Mr. Herbert Kennedy appeared as her
escort. At first the Harvester ignored this, and said to himself that
he was glad she could have enjoyable times and congenial friends, and
he was. But as the letters became fewer, paper paragraphs more frequent,
and approaching spring worked its old insanity in the blood, gradually
an ache crept into his heart again, and there were days when he could
not work it out.

Every letter she wrote he answered just as warmly as he felt that he
dared, but when they were so long coming and his heart was overflowing,
he picked up a pen one night and wrote what he felt. He told her all
about the ice-bound lake, the lonely crows in the big woods, the sap
suckers' cry, and the gay cardinals' whistle. He told her about the
cocoons dangling on bushes or rocking on twigs that he was cutting for
her. He warned her that spring was coming, and soon she would begin to
miss wonders for her pencil. Then he told her about the silent cabin,
the empty rooms, and a lonely man. He begged her not to forget the kiss
she had gone to find for him. He poured out his heart unrestrainedly,
and then folded the letter, sealed and addressed it to her, in care of
the fire fairies, and pitched it into the ashes of the living-room fire
place. But expression made him feel better.

There was another longer wait for the next letter, but he had written
her so many in the meantime that a little heap of them had accumulated
as he passed through the living-room on his way to bed. He had supposed
she would be gone until after Christmas when she left, but he never had
thought of harvesting sassafras and opening the sugar camp alone. In
those days his face appeared weary, and white hairs came again on his
temples. Carey met him on the street and told him that he was going to
the National Convention of Surgeons at New York in March, and wanted him
to go along and present his new medicine for consideration.

"All right," said the Harvester instantly, "I will go."

He went and interviewed Mrs. Carey, and then visited the doctor's
tailor, and a shoe store, and bought everything required to put him in
condition for travelling in good style, and for the banquet he would
be asked to attend. Then he got Mrs. Carey to coach him on spoons and
forks, and declared he was ready. When the doctor saw that the Harvester
really would go, he sat down and wrote the president of the association,
telling him in brief outline of Medicine Woods and the man who had
achieved a wonderful work there, and of the compounding of the new
remedy.

As he expected, return mail brought an invitation for the Harvester to
address the association and describe his work and methods and present
his medicine. The doctor went out in the car over sloppy roads with that
letter, and located the Harvester in the sugar camp. He explained the
situation and to his surprise found his man intensely interested. He
asked many questions as to the length of time, and amount of detail
required in a proper paper, and the doctor told him.

"But if you want to make a clean sweep, David," he said, "write your
paper simply, and practise until it comes easy before you speak."

That night the Harvester left work long enough to get a notebook, and by
the light of the camp fire, and in company with the owls and <DW53>s, he
wrote his outline. One division described his geographical location,
another traced his ancestry and education in wood lore. One was a
tribute to the mother who moulded his character and ground into him
stability for his work. The remainder described his methods in growing
drugs, drying and packing them, and the end was a presentation for their
examination of the remedy that had given life where a great surgeon had
conceded death. Then he began amplification.

When the sugar making was over the Harvester commenced his regular
spring work, but his mind was so busy over his paper that he did not
have much time to realize just how badly his heart was beginning to
ache. Neither did he consign so many letters to the fire fairies, for
now he was writing of the best way to dry hydrastis and preserve ginseng
seed. The day before time to start he drove to Onabasha to try on his
clothing and have Mrs. Carey see if he had been right in his selections.

While he was gone, Granny Moreland, wearing a clean calico dress and
carrying a juicy apple pie, came to the stretch of flooded marsh land,
and finding the path under water, followed the road and crossing a
field reached the levee and came to the bridge of Singing Water where it
entered the lake. She rested a few minutes there, and then went to the
cabin shining between bare branches. She opened the front door, entered,
and stood staring around her.

"Why things is all tore up here," she said. "Now ain't that sensible
of David to put everything away and save it nice and careful until his
woman gets back. Seems as if she's good and plenty long coming; seems
as if her folks needs her mighty bad, or she's having a better time than
the boy is or something."

She set the pie on the table, went through the cabin and up the hill
a little distance, calling the Harvester. When she passed the barn
she missed Betsy and the wagon, and then she knew he was in town. She
returned to the living-room and sat looking at the pie as she rested.

"I'd best put you on the kitchen table," she mused. "Likely he will see
you there first and eat you while you are fresh. I'd hate mortal bad for
him to overlook you, and let you get stale, after all the care I've took
with your crust, and all the sugar, cinnamon, and butter that's under
your lid. You're a mighty nice pie, and you ort to be et hot. Now why
under the sun is all them clean letters pitched in the fireplace?"

Granny knelt and selecting one, she blew off the ashes, wiped it with
her apron and read: "To Ruth, in care of the fire fairies."

"What the Sam Hill is the idiot writin' his woman like that for?" cried
Granny, bristling instantly. "And why is he puttin' pages and pages of
good reading like this must have in it in care of the fire fairies? Too
much alone, I guess! He's going wrong in his head. Nobody at themselves
would do sech a fool trick as this. I believe I had better do something.
Of course I had! These is writ to Ruth; she ort to have them. Wish't I
knowed how she gets her mail, I'd send her some. Mebby three! I'd send a
fat and a lean, and a middlin' so's that she'd have a sample of all the
kinds they is. It's no way to write letters and pitch them in the ashes.
It means the poor boy is honin' to say things he dassent and so he's
writin' them out and never sendin' them at all. What's the little huzzy
gone so long for, anyway? I'll fix her!"

Granny selected three letters, blew away the ashes, and tucked the
envelopes inside her dress.

"If I only knowed how to get at her," she muttered. She stared at the
pie. "I guess you got to go back," she said, "and be et by me. Like as
not I'll stall myself, for I got one a-ready. But if David has got these
fool things counted and misses any, and then finds that pie here, he'll
s'picion me. Yes, I got to take you back, and hurry my stumps at that."

Granny arose with the pie, cast a lingering and covetous glance at the
fireplace, stooped and took another letter, and then started down the
drive. Just as she reached the bridge she looked ahead and saw the
Harvester coming up the levee. Instantly she shot the pie over the
railing and with a groan watched it strike the water and disappear.

"Lord of love!" she gasped, sinking to the seat, "that was one of
grandmother's willer plates that I promised Ruth. 'Tain't likely I'll
ever see hide ner hair of it again. But they wa'ant no place to put it,
and I dassent let him know I'd been up to the cabin. Mebby I can fetch
a boy some day and hire him to dive for it. How long can a plate be in
water and not get spiled anyway? Now what'll I do? My head's all in a
whirl! I'll bet my bosom is a sticking out with his letters 'til he'll
notice and take them from me."

She gripped her hands across her chest and sat staring at the Harvester
as he stopped on the bridge, and seeing her attitude and distressed
face, he sprang from the wagon.

"Why Granny, are you sick?" he cried anxiously.

"Yes!" gasped Granny Moreland. "Yes, David, I am! I'm a miserable woman.
I never was in sech a shape in all my days."

"Let me help you to the cabin, and I'll see what I can do for you,"
offered the Harvester.

"No. This is jest out of your reach," said the old lady. "I want----I
want to see Doctor Carey bad."

"Are you strong enough to ride in or shall I bring him?"

"I can go! I can go as well as not, David, if you'll take me."

"Let me run Betsy to the barn and get the Girl's phaeton. The wagon is
too rough for you. Are the pains in your chest dreadful?"

"I don't know how to describe them," said Granny with perfect truth.

The Harvester leaped into the wagon and caught up the lines. As he
disappeared around the curve of the driveway Granny snatched the letters
from her dress front and thrust them deep into one of her stockings.

"Now, drat you!" she cried. "Stick out all you please. Nobody will see
you there."

In a few minutes the Harvester helped her into the carriage and drove
rapidly toward the city.

"You needn't strain your critter," said Granny. "It's not so bad as
that, David."

"Is your chest any better?"

"A sight better," said Granny. "Shakin' up a little 'pears to do me
good."

"You never should have tried to walk. Suppose I hadn't been here. And
you came the long way, too! I'll have a telephone run to your house so
you can call me after this."

Granny sat very straight suddenly.

"My! wouldn't that get away with some of my foxy neighbours," she said.
"Me to have a 'phone like they do, an' be conversin' at all hours of the
day with my son's folks and everybody. I'd be tickled to pieces, David."

"Then I'll never dare do it," said the Harvester, "because I can't keep
house without you."

"Where's your own woman?" promptly inquired Granny.

"She can't leave her people. Her grandmother is sick."

"Grandmother your foot!" cried the old woman. "I've been hearing that
song and dance from the neighbours, but you got to fool younger people
than me on it, David. When did any grandmother ever part a pair of
youngsters jest married, for months at a clip? I'd like to cast my eyes
on that grandmother. She's a new breed! I was as good a mother as 'twas
in my skin to be, and I'd like to see a child of mine do it for me;
and as for my grandchildren, it hustles some of them to re-cog-nize me
passing on the big road, 'specially if it's Peter's girl with a town
beau."

The Harvester laughed. The old lady leaned toward him with a mist in her
eyes and a quaver in her voice, and asked softly, "Got ary friend that
could help you, David?"

The man looked straight ahead in silence.

"Bamfoozle all the rest of them as much as you please, lad, but I stand
to you in the place of your ma, and so I ast you plainly----got ary
friend that could help?"

"I can think of no way in which any one possibly could help me, dear,"
said the Harvester gently. "It is a matter I can't explain, but I know
of nothing that any one could do."

"You mean you're tight-mouthed! You COULD tell me just like you would
your ma, if she was up and comin'; but you can't quite put me in her
place, and spit it out plain. Now mebby I can help you! Is it her fault
or yourn?"

"Mine! Mine entirely!"

"Hum! What a fool question! I might a knowed it! I never saw a lovinger,
sweeter girl in these parts. I jest worship the ground she treads on;
and you, lad you hain't had a heart in your body sence first you saw her
face. If I had the stren'th, I'd haul you out of this keeridge and I'd
hammer you meller, David Langston. What in the name of sense have you
gone and done to the purty, lovin' child?"

The Harvester's face flushed, but a line around his mouth whitened.

"Loosen up!" commanded Granny. "I got some rights in this case that
mebby you don't remember. You asked me to help you get ready for her,
and I done what you wanted. You invited me to visit her, and I jest
loved her sweet, purty ways. You wanted me to shet up my house and come
over for weeks to help take keer of her, and I done it gladly, for her
pain and your sufferin' cut me as if 'twas my livin' flesh and blood;
so you can't shet me out now. I'm in with you and her to the end. What a
blame fool thing have you gone and done to drive away for months a girl
that fair worshipped you?"

"That's exactly the trouble, Granny," said the Harvester. "She didn't!
She merely respected and was grateful to me, and she loved me as a
friend; but I never was any nearer her husband than I am yours."

"I've always knowed they was a screw loose somewhere," commented Granny.
"And so you've sent her off to her worldly folks in a big, wicked city
to get weaned away from you complete?"

"I sent her to let her see if absence would teach her anything. I had
months with her here, and I lay awake at nights thinking up new plans
to win her. I worked for her love as I never worked for bread, but I
couldn't make it. So I let her go to see if separation would teach her
anything."

"Mercy me! Why you crazy critter! The child did love you! She loved you
'nough an' plenty! She loved you faithful and true! You was jest the
light of her eyes. I don't see how a girl could think more of a man.
What in the name of sense are you expecting months of separation to
teach her, but to forget you, and mebby turn her to some one else?"

"I hoped it would teach her what I call love, means," explained the
Harvester.

"Why you dratted popinjay! If ever in all my born days I wanted to take
a man and jest lit'rally mop up the airth with him, it's right here and
now. 'Absence teach her what you call love.' Idiot! That's your job!"

"But, Granny, I couldn't!"

"Wouldn't, you mean, no doubt! I hain't no manner of a notion in my head
but that child, depending on you, and grateful as she was, and tender
and loving, and all sech as that I hain't a doubt but she come to you
plain and told you she loved you with all her heart. What more could you
ast?"

"That she understand what love means before I can accept what she
offers."

"You puddin' head! You blunderbuss!" cried Granny. "Understand what you
mean by love. If you're going to bar a woman from being a wife 'til
she knows what you mean by love, you'll stop about nine tenths of
the weddings in the world, and t'other tenth will be women that no
decent-minded man would jine with."

"Granny, are you sure?"

"Well livin' through it, and up'ard of seventy years with other women,
ort to teach me something. The Girl offered you all any man needs to ast
or git. Her foundations was laid in faith and trust. Her affections was
caught by every loving, tender, thoughtful thing you did for her; and
everybody knows you did a-plenty, David. I never see sech a master hand
at courtin' as you be. You had her lovin' you all any good woman knows
how to love a man. All you needed to a-done was to take her in your
arms, and make her your wife, and she'd 'a' waked up to what you meant
by love."

"But suppose she never awakened?"

"Aw, bosh! S'pose water won't wet! S'pose fire won't burn! S'pose the
sun won't shine! That's the law of nature, man! If you think I hain't
got no sense at all I jest dare you to ask Doctor Carey. 'Twouldn't take
him long to comb the kinks out of you."

"I don't think you have left any, Granny," said the Harvester. "I see
what you mean, and in all probability you are right, but I can't send
for the Girl."

"Name o' goodness why?"

"Because I sent her away against her will, and now she is remaining so
long that there is every probability she prefers the life she is living
and the friends she has made there, to Medicine Woods and to me. The
only thing I can do now is to await her decision."

"Oh, good Lord!" groaned Granny. "You make me sick enough to kill. Touch
up your nag and hustle me to Doc. You can't get me there quick enough to
suit me."

At the hospital she faced Doctor Carey. "I think likely some of my
innards has got to be cut out and mended," she said. "I'll jest take a
few minutes of your time to examination me, and see what you can do."

In the private office she held the letters toward the doctor. "They
hain't no manner of sickness ailin' me, Doc. The boy out there is in
deep water, and I knowed how much you thought of him, and I hoped you'd
give me a lift. I went over to his place this mornin' to take him a pie,
and I found his settin' room fireplace heapin' with letters he'd writ to
Ruth about things his heart was jest so bustin' full of it eased him
to write them down, and then he hadn't the horse sense and trust in
her jedgment to send them on to her. I picked two fats, a lean, and a
middlin' for samples, and I thought I'd send them some way, and I struck
for home with them an' he ketched me plumb on the bridge. I had to throw
my pie overboard, willer plate and all, and as God is my witness, I was
so flustered the boy had good reason to think I was sick a-plenty; and
soon as he noticed it, I thought of you spang off, and I knowed you'd
know her whereabouts, and I made him fetch me to you. On the way I jest
dragged it from him that he'd sent her away his fool self, because she
didn't sense what he meant by love, and she wa'ant beholden to him same
degree and manner he was to her. Great day, Doc! Did you ever hear a
piece of foolishness to come up with that? I told him to ast you! I told
him you'd tell him that no clean, sweet-minded girl ever had known nor
ever would know what love means to a man 'til he marries her and teaches
her. Ain't it so, Doc?"

"It certainly is."

"Then will you grind it into him, clean to the marrer, and will you send
these letters on to Ruthie?"

"Most certainly I will," said the doctor emphatically. Granny opened the
door and walked out.

"I'm so relieved, David," she said. "He thinks they won't be no manner
o' need to knife me. Likely he can fix up a few pills and send them out
by mail so's that I'll be as good as new again. Now we must get right
out of here and not take valuable time. What do I owe you, Doc?"

"Not a cent," said Doctor Carey. "Thank you very much for coming to me.
You'll soon be all right again."

"I was some worried. Much obliged I am sure. Come on!"

"One minute," said the doctor. "David, I am making up a list of friends
to whom I am going to send programmes of the medical meeting, and I
thought your wife might like to see you among the speakers, and your
subject. What is her address?"

A slow red flushed the Harvester's cheeks. He opened his lips and
hesitated. At last he said, "I think perhaps her people prefer that she
receive mail under her maiden name while with them. Miss Ruth Jameson,
care of Alexander Herron, 5770 Chestnut Street, Philadelphia, will reach
her."

The doctor wrote the address, as if it were the most usual thing in the
world, and asked the Harvester if he was ready to make the trip east.

"I think we had best start to-night," he said. "We want a day to grow
accustomed to our clothes and new surroundings before we run up squarely
against serious business."

"I will be ready," promised the Harvester.

He took Granny home, set his house in order, installed the man he was
leaving in charge, touched a match to the heap in the fireplace, and
donning the new travelling suit, he went to Doctor Carey's.

Mrs. Carey added a few touches, warned him to remember about the forks
and spoons, and not to forget to shave often, and saw them off. At the
station Carey said to him, "You know, David, we can change at Wayne and
go through Buffalo, or we can take the Pittsburg and go and come through
Philadelphia."

"I am contemplating a trip to Philadelphia," said the Harvester, "but I
believe I will not be ready for, say a month yet. I have a theory and it
dies hard. If it does not work out the coming month, I will go, perhaps,
but not now. Let us see how many kinds of a fool I make of myself in New
York before I attempt the Quakers."

Almost to the city, the doctor smiled at the Harvester.

"David, where did you get your infernal assurance?" he asked.

"In the woods," answered the Harvester placidly. "In doing clean work.
With my fingers in the muck, and life literally teeming and boiling in
sound and action, around, above, and beneath me, a right estimate of my
place and province in life comes naturally in daily handling stores
on which humanity depends, I go even deeper than you surgeons and
physicians. You are powerless unless I reinforce your work with drugs on
which you can rely. I do clean, honest work. I know its proper place and
value to the world. That is why I called what I have to say, 'The Man
in the Background.' There is no reason why I should shiver and shrink
at meeting and explaining my work to my fellows. Every man has his
vocation, and some of you in the limelight would cut a sorry figure if
the man in the background should fail you at the critical moment. Don't
worry about me, Doc. I am all serene. You won't find I possess either
nerves or fear. 'Be sure you are right, and then go ahead,' is my law."

"Well I'll be confounded!" said the doctor.

In a large hall, peopled with thousands of medical men, the name of the
Harvester was called the following day and his subject was announced. He
arose in his place and began to talk.

"Take the platform," came in a roar from a hundred throats.

The Harvester hesitated.

"You must, David," whispered Carey.

The Harvester made his way forward and was guided through a side door,
and a second later calmly walked down the big stage to the front, and
stood at ease looking over his audience, as if to gauge its size and the
pitch to which he should raise his voice. His lean frame loomed every
inch of his six feet, his broad shoulders were square, his clean shaven
face alert and afire. He wore a spring suit of light gray of good
quality and cut, and he was perfect as to details.

"This scarcely seems compatible with my subject," he remarked casually.
"I certainly appear very much in the foreground just at present, but
perhaps that is quite as well. It may be time that I assert myself. I
doubt if there is a man among you who has not handled my products more
or less; you may enjoy learning where and how they are prepared, and
understanding the manner in which my work merges with yours. I think
perhaps the first thing is to paint you as good a word picture as I can
of my geographical location."

Then the Harvester named latitude and longitude and degrees of
temperature. He described the lake, the marsh, the wooded hill, the
swale, and open sunny fields. He spoke of water, soil, shade, and
geographical conditions. "Here I was born," he said, "on land owned
by my father and grandfather before me, and previous to them, by the
Indians. My male ancestors, so far as I can trace them, were men of
the woods, hunters, trappers, herb gatherers. My mother was from the
country, educated for a teacher. She had the most inexorable will power
of any woman I ever have known. From my father I inherited my love for
muck on my boots, resin in my nostrils, the long trail, the camp fire,
forest sounds and silences in my soul. From my mother I learned to read
good books, to study subjects that puzzled me, to tell the truth, to
keep my soul and body clean, and to pursue with courage the thing to
which I set my hand.

"There was not money enough to educate me as she would; together we
learned to find it in the forest. In early days we sold ferns and wild
flowers to city people, harvested the sap of the maples in spring,
and the nut crop of the fall. Later, as we wanted more, we trapped for
skins, and collected herbs for the drug stores. This opened to me a
field I was peculiarly fitted to enter. I knew woodcraft instinctively,
I had the location of every herb, root, bark, and seed that will endure
my climate; I had the determination to stick to my job, the right books
to assist me, and my mother's invincible will power to uphold me where I
wavered.

"As I look into your faces, men, I am struck with the astounding thought
that some woman bore the cold sweat and pain of labour to give life to
each of you. I hope few of you prolonged that agony as I did. It was in
the heart of my mother to make me physically clean, and to that end she
sent me daily into the lake, so long as it was not ice covered, and put
me at exercises intended to bring full strength to every sinew and fibre
of my body. It was in her heart to make me morally clean, so she took
me to nature and drilled me in its forces and its methods of reproducing
life according to the law. Her work was good to a point that all men
will recognize. From there on, for a few years, she held me, not because
I was man enough to stand, but because she was woman enough to support
me. Without her no doubt I would have broken the oath I took; with her
I won the victory and reached years of manhood and self-control as she
would have had me. The struggle wore her out at half a lifetime, but
as a tribute to her memory I cannot face a body of men having your
opportunities without telling you that what was possible to her and
to me is possible to all mothers and men. If she is above and hears me
perhaps it will recompense some of her shortened years if she knows I am
pleading with you, as men having the greatest influence of any living,
to tell and to teach the young that a clean life is possible to them.
The next time any of you are called upon to address a body of men tell
them to learn for themselves and to teach their sons, and to hold them
at the critical hour, even by sweat and blood, to a clean life; for in
this way only can feeble-minded homes, almshouses, and the scarlet woman
be abolished. In this way only can men arise to full physical and mental
force, and become the fathers of a race to whom the struggle for clean
manhood will not be the battle it is with us.

"By the distorted faces, by the misshapen bodies, by marks of
degeneracy, recognizable to your practised eyes everywhere on the
streets, by the agony of the mother who bore you, and later wept over
you, I conjure you men to live up to your high and holy privilege, and
tell all men that they can be clean, if they will. This in memory of the
mother who shortened her days to make me a moral man. And if any among
you is the craven to plead immorality as a safeguard to health, I ask,
what about the health of the women you sacrifice to shield your precious
bodies, and I offer my own as the best possible refutation of that
cowardly lie. I never have been ill a moment in all my life, and
strength never has failed me for work to which I set my hand.

"The rapidly decreasing supply of drugs and the adulterated importations
early taught me that the day was coming when it would be an absolute
necessity to raise our home supplies. So, while yet in my teens, I began
collecting from the fields and woods for miles around such medicinal
stuff as grew in my father's fields, marsh, and woods, and planting
more wherever I found anything growing naturally in its prime. I merely
enlarged nature's beds and preserved their natural condition. As
the plants spread and the harvest increased, I built a dry-house on
scientific principles, a large store-room, and later a laboratory in
which I have been learning to prepare some of my crude material for the
market, combining ideas of my own in remedies, and at last producing
one your president just has indicated that I come to submit to you as a
final resort in certain conditions.

"My operations now have spread to close six hundred acres of almost
solid medicinal growth, including a little lake, around the shores of
which flourish a quadruple setting of water-loving herbs."

Occasionally he shifted his position or easily walked across the
platform and faced his audience from a different direction. His voice
was strong, deep, and rang clearly and earnestly. His audience sat on
the front edge of their chairs, and listened to something new, with
mouths half agape. A few times Carey turned from the speaker to face
the audience. He agonized in his heart that it was a closed session, and
that his wife was not there to hear, and that the Girl was missing it.

By the bent backs and flying fingers of the reporters at their table in
front he could see that to-morrow the world would read the Harvester's
speech; and if it were true that the little mother had shortened
her days to produce him, she had done earth a service for which many
generations would call her blessed. For the doctor could look ahead,
and he knew that this man would not escape. The call for him and his
unimpeachable truth would come from everywhere, and his utterances would
carry as far as newspapers and magazines were circulated. The good he
would do would be past estimation.

The Harvester continued. He was describing the most delicate and
difficult of herbs to secure. He was telling how they could be raised,
prepared, kept, and compounded. He was discussing diseases that did not
readily yield to treatment, pointing out what drugs were customarily
employed and offering, if any of them had such cases, and would send
to him, to forward samples of unadulterated stuff sufficient for a test
comparison with what they were using. He was walking serenely and surely
into the heart of every man before him.

Just at the point where it was the psychological time to close, he
stopped and stood a long instant facing them, and then he asked softly,
"Did any man among you ever see the woman to whom he had given a strong
man's first passion of love, slowly dying before him?"

One breathless instant he waited and then continued, "Gentlemen, I
recently saw this in my own case. For days it was coming, so at night I
shut myself in my laboratory, and from the very essence of the purest
of my self-compounded drugs I distilled a stimulant into which I put a
touch of heart remedy, a brace for weakening nerves, a vitalization of
sluggish blood. As I worked, I thought in that thought which embodied
the essence of prayer, and when my day and my hour came, and a man who
has been the president of your honourable body, and is known to all of
you, said it was death, I took this combination that I now present to
you, and with the help of the Almighty and a woman above the price of
rubies, I kept breath in the girl I love, and to-day she is at full tide
of womanhood. As a thank offering, the formula is yours. Test it as you
will. Use it if you find it good. Gentlemen, I thank you!"

Carey sank in his chair and watched the Harvester cross the stage. As
he disappeared the tumult began, and it lasted until the president arose
and brought him back to make another bow, and then they rioted until
they wore themselves out. In an immaculate dress suit the Harvester sat
that night on the right of the gray-haired president and responded to
the toast, "The Harvester of the Woods." Then the reporters carried him
away to be photographed, and to show him the gay sights of New York.

In the train the next day, steadily speeding west, he said to Doctor
Carey: "I feel as the old woman of Mother Goose who said, 'Lawk-a-mercy
on us, can this be really I?'"

"You just bet it is!" cried the doctor. "And you have cut out work for
yourself in good shape."

"What do you mean?"

"I mean that this is a beginning. You will be called upon to speak again
and again."

"The point is, do you honestly think I helped any?"

"You did inestimable good. It only can help men to hear plain truth that
is personal experience. As for that dope of yours, it will come closer
raising the dead than anything I ever saw. Next case I see slipping,
after I've done my best, I'm going to try it out for myself."

"All right! 'Phone me and I'll bring some fresh and help you."

At Buffalo the doctor left the car and bought a paper. As he had
expected the portrait and speech of the Harvester were featured. The
reporters had been gracious. They had done all that was just to a great
event, and allowed themselves some latitude. He immediately mailed the
paper to the Girl, and at Cleveland bought another for himself. When
he showed it to the Harvester, as he glanced at it he observed, "Do I
appear like that?" Then he went on talking with a man he had met who
interested him.



CHAPTER XXI. THE COMING OF THE BLUEBIRD

The Harvester stopped at the mail box on his way home and among the mass
of matter it contained was something from the Girl. It was a scrap as
long as his least finger and three times as wide, and by the postmark
it had lain four days in the box. On opening it, he found only her card
with a line written across it, but the man went up the hill and into the
cabin as if a cyclone were driving him, for he read, "Has your bluebird
come?"

He threw his travelling bag on the floor, ran to the telephone, and
called the station. "Take this message," he said. "Mrs. David Langston,
care of Alexander Herron, 5770 Chestnut Street, Philadelphia. Found note
after four days' absence. Bluebird long past due. The fairies have told
it that my fate hereafter lies in your hands.

"As always. David."

The Harvester turned from the instrument and bent to embrace Belshazzar,
leaping in ecstasy beside him.

"Understand that, Bel?" he asked. "I don't know but it means something.
Maybe it doesn't----not a thing! And again, there is a chance----only
the merest possibility----that it does. We'll risk it, Bel, and to
begin on I have nailed it as hard as I knew how. Next, we will clean
the house----until it shines, and then we will fill the cupboard, and if
anything does happen we won't be caught napping. Yes, boy, we will take
the chance! We can't be any worse disappointed than we have been before
and survived it. Come along!"

He picked up the bag and arranged its contents, carefully brushed and
folded on his shelves and in his closet. Then he removed the travelling
suit, donned the old brown clothes and went to the barn to see that his
creatures had been cared for properly. Early the next morning he awoke
and after feeding and breakfasting instead of going to harvest spice
brush and alder he stretched a line and hung the bedding from room after
room to air and sun. He swept, dusted, and washed windows, made beds,
and lastly polished the floors throughout the cabin. He set everything
in order, and as a finishing touch, filled vases, pitchers, and bowls
with the bloom of red bud and silky willow catkins. He searched the
south bank, but there was not a violet, even in the most exposed places.
By night he was tired and a little of the keen edge of his ardour was
dulled. The next day he worked scrubbing the porches, straightening
the lawn and hedges, even sweeping the driveway to the bridge clear
of wind-whirled leaves and straw. He scouted around the dry-house and
laboratory, and spent several extra hours on the barn so that when
evening came everything was in perfect order. Then he dressed, ate his
supper and drove to the city.


He stopped at the mail box, but there was nothing from the Girl. The
Harvester did not know whether he was sorry or glad. A letter might have
said the same thing. Nothing meant a delightful possibility, and between
the two he preferred the latter. He whistled and sang as he drove to
Onabasha, and Belshazzar looked at him with mystified eyes, for this was
not the master he had known of late. He did not recognize the dress or
the manner, but his dog heart was sympathetic to the man's every mood,
and he remembered times when a drive down the levee always had been like
this, for to-night the Harvester's tongue was loosened and he talked in
the old way.

"Just four words, Bel," he said. "And, as I remarked before, they may
mean the most wonderful thing on earth, and possibly nothing at all.
But it is in the heart of man to hope, Bel, and so we are going to live
royally for a week or two, just on hope, old boy. If anything should
happen, we are ready, rooms shining, beds fresh, fireplaces filled and
waiting a match, ice chest cool, and when we get back it will be stored.
Also a secret, Bel; we are going to a florist and a fruit store. While
we are at it, we will do the thing right; but we will stay away from
Doc, until we are sure of something. He means well, but we don't like
to be pitied, do we, Bel? Our friends don't manage their eyes and voices
very well these days. Never mind! Our time will come yet. The bluebird
will not fail us, but never before has it been so late."

On his return he filled the pantry shelves with packages, stored the
ice chest, and set a basket of delicious fruit on the dining table. Two
boxes remained. He opened the larger one and took from it an arm load of
white lilies that he carried up the hill and divided between the mounds
under the oak. Then he uncovered his head, and standing at the foot of
them he looked among the boughs of the big tree and listened intently.
After a time a soft, warm wind, catkin-scented, crept from the lake,
and began a murmur among the clusters of brown leaves clinging to the
branches.

"Mother," said the Harvester, "were you with me? Did I do it right? Did
I tell them what you would have had me say for the boys? Are you glad
now you held me to the narrow way? Do you want me to go before men if
I am asked, as Doc says I will be, and tell them that the only way to
abolish pain is for them to begin at the foundation by living clean
lives? I don't know if I did any good, but they listened to me. Anyway,
I did the best I knew. But that isn't strange; you ground it into me to
do that every day, until it is almost an instinct. Mother, dear, can you
tell me about the bluebird? Is that softest little rustle of all your
voice? and does it say 'hope'? I think so, and I thank you for the
word."

The man's eyes dropped to earth.

"And you other mother," he said, "have you any message for me? Up where
you are can you sweep the world with understanding eyes and tell me why
my bluebird does not come? Does it know that this year your child and
not chance must settle my fate? Can you look across space and see if she
is even thinking of me? But I know that! She had to be thinking of me
when she wrote that line. Rather can you tell me----will she come? Do
you think I am man enough to be trusted with her future, if she does?
One thing I promise you: if such joy ever comes to me, I will know how
to meet it gently, thankfully, tenderly, please God. Good night, little
women. I hope you are sleeping well----"

He turned and went down the hill, entered the cabin and took from the
other box a mass of Parma violets. He put these in the pink bowl and
placed it on the table beside the Girl's bed. He stood for a time, and
then began pulling single flowers from the bowl and dropping them over
the pillow and snowy spread.

"God, how I love her!" he whispered softly.

At last he went out and closed the door. He was tired and soon fell
asleep with the night breeze stirring his hair, and the glamour of
moonlight flooding the lake touched his face. Clearly it etched the
strong, manly features, the fine brow and chin, and painted in unusual
tenderness the soft lines around the mouth. The little owl wavered its
love story, a few frogs were piping, and the Harvester lay breathing the
perfumed spring air deeply and evenly. Near midnight Belshazzar awakened
him by arising from the bedside and walking to the door.

"What is it, Bel?" inquired the Harvester.

The dog whined softly. The man turned his head toward the lake. A ray of
red light touched the opposite embankment and came wavering across the
surface. The Harvester sat up. Two big, flaming eyes were creeping up
the levee.

"That," said the Harvester, "might be Doc coming for me to help him try
out my bottled sunshine, or it might be my bluebird."

He tossed back the cover, swung his feet to the floor, setting each in a
slipper beside the bed, and arose, dressing as he started for the door.
As he opened the screen and stepped on the veranda a passenger car from
the city stopped, and the Harvester went down the walk to meet it. His
heart turned over when he saw a woman's hand on the door.

"Permit me," he said, taking the handle and bringing it back with a
sweep. A tall form arose, bent forward, and descended to the step. The
full flare of moonlight fell on the glowing face of the Girl.

"Harvester, is it you?" she asked.

"Yes," gasped the man.

Two hands came fluttering out, and he just had presence of mind to step
in range so that they rested on his shoulders.

"Has the bluebird come?"

"Not yet!"

"Then I am not too late?"

"Never too late to come to me, Ruth."

"I am welcome?"

"I have no words to tell you how welcome."

She swayed forward and the Harvester tried to reach her lips, but they
brushed his cheek and touched his ear.

"I have brought one more kiss I want to try," she whispered.

The Harvester crushed her in his arms until he frightened himself for
fear he had hurt her, and murmured an ecstasy of indistinct love words
to her. Presently her feet touched the ground and she drew away from
him.

"Harvester," she whispered, "I couldn't wait any longer; indeed I could
not: and I couldn't leave grandfather and grandmother, and I didn't
know what in the world to do, so I just brought them along. Are they
welcome?"

"Aside from you, I would rather have them than any people on earth,"
said the Harvester.

There were two sounds in the car; one was an approving murmur, and the
other an undeniable snort. The Harvester felt the reassuring pressure of
the Girl's hand.

"Please, Ruth," he said, "go turn on the light so that I can see to help
grandmother."

A foot stamped before the front seat. "Madam Herron, if you please!"
cried an acrid voice.

"'Madam Herron,'" said the Harvester gently, as he set a foot on the
step, reached in and bodily picked up a little old lady and started up
the walk with her in his arms.

"Careful there, sir!" roared a voice after him.

The Harvester could feel the quake of the laughing woman and he smiled
broadly as he entered the cabin, and placed her in a large chair before
the fire. Then he wheeled and ran back to the car, reaching it as the
man was making an effort to descend. It could be seen that he had been
tall, before time and sorrow had bent him, and keen eyes gleamed below
shaggy white brows from under his hat brim. He had a white moustache,
and his hair was snowy.

"Allow me," said the Harvester reaching a hand.

"If you touch me I will cane you," said Mr. Alexander Herron.

There was nothing to do but step back. The cane, wheel, and a long coat
skirt interfering, the old man fell headlong, and only quick hands saved
him a severe jolt and bruises. He stood glaring in the moonlight while
his hat was restored.

"If you run your car to the curve you can back toward the south and turn
easily," said the Harvester to the driver. As the automobile passed them
he offered his arm. "May I show you to the fire? These spring nights are
chilly."

"'Chilly!' Demnition cold is what they are! I'm frozen to the bone! This
will be the end of us both! Dragging people of our age around at this
hour of night. Of all the accursed stubbornness!"

"There are three low steps," said the Harvester, "now a straight stretch
of walk, now two steps; there you are on the level. Here is an easy
chair. It would be better to leave on your coat, until I light the
fire."

He knelt and scratched a match, and almost instantly a flame sprang from
the heap of dry kindling, and began to wrap around the big logs.

"How pretty!" exclaimed a soft voice.

"Kind of a hunting lodge in the wilds, is it?" growled a rough one.
"Marcella, you will take your death here!"

"I'm sure I feel no exposure. Really, Alexander, if I had passed away
every time you have prophesied that I would in the past twenty years
you'd have the largest private cemetery in existence. If you would not
be so pessimistic I could quite enjoy the trip. It's so long since I've
ridden in the cars."

"Of all the abandoned places! And for you to be here, after your years
in bed!"

"But I'm not nearly so tired as I am at home, Alexander, truly."

"Let me help you, grandfather," offered the Girl.

She went to him and took his hat and stick.

"Leave me my cane," he cried. "Any instant that beast may attack some of
us."

The Girl laughed merrily.

"Why grandfather!" she chided, "Bel is the finest dog you ever knew,
he is my best friend here. By the hour he has protected me, and he is
gentle as a kitten. He's crazy over my coming home."

She knelt on the floor, put her arms around the dog's neck, and the
delighted brute quivered with the joy of her caress and the sound of her
loved voice.

"Ruthie!" cautioned the gentle lady.

"Put that cur out of doors, where animals belong," roared the old man,
lifting his stick.

"Careful!" warned the grave voice of the Harvester.

"I thought you said he was gentle as a kitten!"

"Grandfather, I said that," cried the Girl.

"Well wasn't it the truth?"

"You can see how he loves me. Didn't I ever tell you that Bel made the
first friendly overture I ever received in this part of the country?
He's watched me by the day, even while I slept."

"Then what's all this infernal fuss about?"

"Try striking him if you want to find out," explained the Harvester
gently. "You see, Belshazzar and I are accustomed to living here alone
and very quietly. He is excited over the Girl's return, because she is
his friend, and he has not forgotten her. Then this is the first time in
his life he ever heard an irritable voice from a visitor or saw a cane,
and it angers him. He is perfectly safe to guard a baby, if he is gently
treated, but he is a sure throat hold to a stranger who bespeaks him
roughly or attempts to strike. He would be of no use as a guard to
valuable property while I sleep if he were otherwise. Bel, come here!
Lie still."

The dog sank to the floor beside the Harvester, but his sharp eyes
followed the Girl, and the hair arose on his neck at every rasping note
of the old man's voice.

"I wouldn't give such a creature house room for a minute," insisted the
guest.

"Wait until you see him work and become acquainted with him, and you
will change that verdict," prophesied the Harvester.

"I never was known to change an opinion. Never, sir! Never!" cried the
testy voice.

"How unfortunate!" remarked the Harvester suavely.

"Explain yourself! Explain yourself, sir!"

"There never has been, there never will be, a man on this earth," said
the Harvester, "wholly free from mistakes. Are you warm now?" He turned
to the little lady, cutting off a reply with his question.

"Nice and warm and quite sleepy," she said.

"What may I bring you for a light lunch before you go to bed?"

"Oh, could I have a bite of something?"

"If only I am fortunate enough to have anything you will care for. What
about a bowl of hot milk and a slice of toast?"

"Why I think that would be just the thing!"

"Excuse me," said the Harvester rising.

He went to the kitchen and they could hear him moving around.

"I wish the big brute would take his beast along," growled Mr. Alexander
Herron.

"Come, Bel," ordered the Girl. "Let's go to the kitchen."

The dog instantly arose and followed her.

"What can I do to help?" she asked as they reached the door.

"Remain where you won't dazzle my eyes," said the Harvester, "until I
help the gentle lady and the gentle man to bed."

Presently he came with a white cloth, two spoons, and a plate of bread.
He spread the cloth on the table, laid the spoons on it, and opening the
little cupboard, took out a long toasting fork, and sticking it into a
slice of bread, he held it over the coals. When it grew golden brown he
lifted the table beside the chair, and brought a bowl of scalded milk.

"Marcella, that stuff will be too smoky for you! Your stomach will rebel
at it."

"Grandfather, there will not be a suspicion of odour," said the Girl. "I
have had it that way often."

"Then no wonder you came from this place looking like a picked crane, if
that is a sample of what you were fed on!"

The face of the Harvester grew redder than the heat of the fire
necessitated, but at the ringing laugh of the Girl he set his teeth
and went on toasting bread. Grandmother crumbled some in the milk and
picking up the spoon tested the combination. She was very hungry, and it
was good. She began eating with relish.

"Alexander, you will be the loser if you don't have some of this," she
said. "It's just delicious!"

"Maybe smoked spoon victuals are proper for invalid women," he retorted,
"but they are mighty thin diet for a hardy man."

"What about a couple of eggs and some beef extract?" suggested the cook.

"Sounds more sensible by a long shot."

"Ruth, you make this toast," said the Harvester and disappeared.

Presently he placed before his guest a couple of eggs poached in milk,
a steaming bowl of beef juice, and a plate of toast. For one instant
the Harvester thought this was going into the fire, the next a slice was
picked up and smelled testily. The Girl sat on her grandfather's chair
arm, and breaking a morsel of toast dipped it into the broth and tasted
it.

"Oh but that is good!" she cried. "Why haven't I some also? Am I
supposed to have no 'tummy'?"

"Your turn next," said the Harvester, as he again gave her the fork and
went to the kitchen.

When he returned and served the Girl he found her grandfather eating
heartily.

"Why I think this is fun," said the gentle lady. "I haven't had such a
fine time in ages. I love the heat of the flame on my body and things
taste so good. I could go to sleep without any narcotic, right now."

Close her knee the Harvester knelt on the hearth with his toasting fork.
She leaned forward and ran her fingers through his hair.

"You're a braw laddie," she said. "Now I see why Ruthie WOULD come."

The Harvester took the frail hand and kissed it. "Thank you!" he
returned.

"Mush!" exploded the grizzled man in the rear.

When no one wanted more food the Harvester stacked and carried away the
dishes, swept the hearth, and replaced the toaster.

"Ruth and I often lunched this way last fall," he said. "We liked it for
a change."

"Alexander, have you noticed?" asked the little woman as she lifted wet
eyes to a beautiful portrait of her daughter beside the chimney.

"D'ye think I'm blind? Saw it as I entered the door. Poor taste! Very!
Brown may match the rug and wood-work, but it's a wretched colour for a
young girl in her gay time. Should be pink and white with a gold frame."

"That would be beautiful," agreed the Harvester. "We must have one that
way. This is not an expensive picture. It is only an enlargement from an
old photograph."

"We have a number of very handsome likenesses. Which one can you spare
Ruth, Marcella?"

"The one she likes best," said the lady promptly.

"And the other is your mother, no doubt. What a girlish, beautiful
face!"

"Wonderfully fine!" growled a gruff old voice tinctured with tears, and
the Harvester began to see light.

The old man arose. "Ruthie, help your grandmother to bed," he said. "And
you, sir, have the goodness to walk a few steps with me."

The Harvester sprang up and brought Mr. Herron his coat and hat and held
the door. The Girl brushed past him.

"To the oak," she whispered.

They went into the night, and without a word the Harvester took his
guest's arm and guided him up the hill. When they reached the two mounds
the moon shining between the branches touched the lily faces with with
holy whiteness.

"She sleeps there," said the Harvester, indicating the place.

Then he turned and went down the path a little distance and waited until
he feared the night air would chill the broken old man.

"You can see better to-morrow," he said as he touched the shaking figure
and assisted it to arise.

"Your work?" Mr. Alexander Herron touched the lilies with his walking
stick.

The Harvester assented.

"Do you mind if I carry one to Marcella?"

The Harvester trembled as he stooped to select the largest and whitest,
and with sudden illumination, he fully understood. He helped the
tottering old man to the cabin, where he sat silently before the
fireplace softly touching the lily face with his lips.

"I have put grandmother in my bed, tucked her in warmly, and she says it
is soft and fine," laughed the Girl, coming to them. "Now you go before
she falls asleep, and I hope you will rest well."

She bent and kissed him.

The Harvester held the door.

"Can I be of any service?" he inquired.

"No, I'm no helpless child."

"Then to my best wishes for sound sleep the remainder of the night, I
will add this," said the Harvester----"You may rest in peace concerning
your dear girl. I sympathize with your anxiety. Good night!"

Alexander Herron threw out his hands in protest.

"I wouldn't mind admitting that you are a gentleman in a month or two,"
he said, "but it's a demnation humiliation to have it literally wrung
from me to-night!"

He banged the door in the face of the amazed Harvester, who turned
to the Girl as she leaned against the mantel. He stood absorbing the
glowing picture of beauty and health that she made. She had removed her
travelling dress and shoes, and was draped in a fleecy white wool kimono
and wearing night slippers. Her hair hung in two big braids as it had
during her illness. She was his sick girl again in costume, but radiant
health glowed on her lovely face. The Harvester touched a match to a few
candles and turned out the acetylene lights. Then he stood before her.

"Now, bluebird," he said gently. "Ruth, you always know where to find
me, if you will look at your feet. I thought I loved you all in my power
when you went, but absence has taught its lessons. One is that I can
grow to love you more every day I live, and the other that I probably
trifled with the highest gift you had to offer, when I sent you away.
I may have been right; Granny and Doc think I was wrong. You know the
answer. You said there was another kiss for me. Ruth, is it the same or
a different one?"

"It is different. Quite, quite different!"

"And when?" The Harvester stretched out longing arms. The Girl stepped
back.

"I don't know," she said. "I had it when I started, but I lost it on the
way."

The Harvester staggered under the disappointment.

"Ruth, this has gone far enough that you wouldn't play with me, merely
for the sake of seeing me suffer, would you?"

"No!" cried the Girl. "No! I mean it! I knew just what I wanted to say
when I started; but we had to take grandmother out of bed. She wouldn't
allow me to leave her, and I wouldn't stay away from you any longer. She
fainted when we put her on the car and grandfather went wild. He almost
killed the porters, and he raved at me. He said my mother had ruined
their lives, and now I would be their death. I got so frightened I had a
nervous chill and I'm so afraid she will grow worse----"

"You poor child!" shuddered the Harvester. "I see! I understand! What
you need is quiet and a good rest."

He placed her in a big easy chair and sitting on the hearth rug he
leaned against her knee and said, "Now tell me, unless you are so tired
that you should go to bed."

"I couldn't possibly sleep until I have told you," said the Girl.

"If you're merciful, cut it short!" implored the Harvester.

"I think it begins," she said slowly, "when I went because you sent me
and I didn't want to go. Of course, as soon as I saw grandfather and
grandmother, heard them talk, and understood what their lives had been,
and what might have been, why there was only one thing to do, as I could
see it, and that was to compensate their agony the best I could. I think
I have, David. I really think I have made them almost happy. But I told
them all any one could tell about you in the start, and from the first
grandmother would have been on your side; but you see how grandfather
is, and he was absolutely determined that I should live with them, in
their home, all their lives. He thought the best way to accomplish that
would be to separate me from you and marry me to the son of his partner.

"There are rooms packed with the lovely things they bought me, David,
and everything was as I wrote you. Some of the people who came were
wonderful, so gracious and beautiful, I loved almost all of them. They
took me places where there were pictures, plays, and lovely parties, and
I studied hard to learn some music, to dance, ride and all the things
they wanted me to do, and to read good books, and to learn to meet
people with graciousness to equal theirs, and all of it. Every day I
grew stronger and met more people, and there were different places to
go, and always, when anything was to be done, up popped Mr. Herbert
Kennedy and said and did exactly the right thing, and he could be
extremely nice, David."

"I haven't a doubt!" said the Harvester, laying hold of her kimono.

"And he popped up so much that at last I saw he was either pretending
or else he really was growing very fond of me, so one day when we were
alone I told him all about you, to make him see that he must not. He
laughed at me, and said exactly what you did, that I didn't love you
at all, that it was gratitude, that it was the affection of a child. He
talked for hours about how grandfather and grandmother had suffered,
how it was my duty to live with them and give you up, even if I cared
greatly for you; but he said what I felt was not love at all. Then he
tried to tell me what he thought love was, and I could see very clearly
that if it was like that, I didn't love you, but I came a whole world
closer it than loving him, and I told him so. He laughed again and said
I was mistaken, and that he was going to teach me what real love was,
and then I could not be driven back to you. After that, everybody and
everything just pushed me toward him with both hands, except one person.
She was a young married woman and I met her at the very first. She
was the only real friend I ever had, and at last, the latter part of
February, when things were the very worst, I told her. I told her every
single thing. She was on your side. She said you were twice the man
Herbert Kennedy was, and as soon as I found I could talk to her about
you, I began going there and staying as long as I could, just to talk
and to play with her baby.

"Her husband was a splendid young fellow, and I grew very fond of him.
I knew she had told him, because he suddenly began talking to me in the
kindest way, and everything he said seemed to be what I most wanted to
hear. I got along fairly well until hints of spring began to come, and
then I would wonder about my hedge, and my gold garden, and if the ice
was off the lake, and about my boat and horse, and I wanted my room,
and oh, David, most of all I wanted you! Just you! Not because you
could give me anything to compare in richness with what they could, not
because this home was the best I'd ever known except theirs, not for any
reason at all only just that I wanted to see your face, hear your voice,
and have you pick me up and take me in your arms when I was tired. That
was when I almost quit writing. I couldn't say what I wanted to, and I
wouldn't write trivial things, so I went on day after day just groping."

"And you killed me alive," said the Harvester.

"I was afraid of that, but I couldn't write. I just couldn't! It was ten
days ago that I thought of the bluebird's coming this year and what it
would mean to you, and THAT killed me, Man! It just hurt my heart
until it ached, to know that you were out here alone; and that night I
couldn't sleep, because I was thinking of you, and it came to me that if
I had your lips then I could give you a much, much better kiss than the
last, and when it was light I wrote that line.

"Nearly a week later I got your answer early in the morning, and it
almost drove me wild. I took it and went for the day with May, and I
told her. She took me upstairs, and we talked it over, and before I left
she made me promise that I would write you and explain how I felt, and
ask you what you thought. She wanted you to come there and see if you
couldn't make them at least respect you. I know I was crying, and she
was bathing the baby. She went to bring something she had forgotten, and
she gave him to me to hold, just his little naked body. He stood on my
lap and mauled my face, and pulled my hair, and hugged me with his stout
little arms and kissed me big, soft, wet kisses, and something sprang to
life in my heart that never before had been there. I just cried all over
him and held him fast, and I couldn't give him up when she came back. I
saw why I'd wanted a big doll all my life, right then; and oh, dear!
the doll you sent was beautiful, but, David, did you ever hold a little,
living child in your arms like that?"

"I never did," said the Harvester huskily.

He looked at her face and saw the tears rolling, but he could say no
more, so he leaned his head against her knee, and finding one of her
hands he drew it to his lips.

"It is wonderful," said the Girl softly. "It awakens something in
your heart that makes it all soft and tender, and you feel an awful
responsibility, too. Grandmother had them telephone at last, and May
helped me bathe my face and fix my hat. When we went to the carriage Mr.
Kennedy was there to take me home. We went past grandmother's florist to
get her some violets----David, she is sleeping under yours, with just a
few touching her lips. Oh it was lovely of you to get them; your fairies
must have told you! She has them every day, and one of the objections
she made to coming here was that she couldn't do without them in winter,
and she found some on her pillow the very first thing. David, you are
wonderful! And grandfather with his lily! I know where he found that! I
knew instantly. Ah, there are fairies who tell you, because you deserve
to know."

The Girl bent and slipping her arm around his neck hugged him tight
an instant, and then she continued unsteadily: "While he was in the
shop----Harvester, this is like your wildest dream, but it's truest
truth----a boy came down the walk crying papers, and as I live, he
called your name. I knew it had to be you because he said, 'First drug
farm in America! Wonderful medicine contributed to the cause of science!
David Langston honoured by National Medical Association!' I just stood
in the carriage and screamed, 'Boy! Boy!' until the coachman thought I
had lost my senses. He whistled and got me the paper. I was shaking so
I asked him how to find anything you wanted quickly, and he pointed the
column where events are listed; and when I found the third page there
was your face so splendidly reproduced, and you seemed so fine and noble
to me I forgot about the dress suit and the badge in your buttonhole,
or to wonder when or how or why it could have happened. I just sat there
shouting in my soul, 'David! David! Medicine Man! Harvester Man!' again
and again."

"I don't know what I said to Mr. Kennedy or how I got to my room. I
scanned it by the column, at last I got to paragraphs, and finally I
read all the sentences. David, I kissed that newspaper face a hundred
times, and if you could have had those, Man, I think you would have said
they were right. David, there is nothing to cry over!"

"I'm not!" said the Harvester, wiping the splashes from her hand. "But,
Ruth, forget what I said about being brief. I didn't realize what was
coming. I should have said, if you've any mercy at all, go slowly! This
is the greatest thing that ever happened or ever will happen to me. See
that you don't leave out one word of it."

"I told you I had to tell you first," said the Girl.

"I understand now," said the Harvester, his head against her knee while
he pressed her hand to his lips. "I see! Your coming couldn't be perfect
without knowing this first. Go on, dear heart, and slowly! You owe me
every word."

"When I had it all absorbed, I carried the paper to the library and
said, 'Grandfather, such a wonderful thing has happened. A man has had a
new idea, and he has done a unique work that the whole world is going
to recognize. He has stood before men and made a speech that few, oh
so few, could make honestly, and he has advocated right living, oh
so nobly, and he has given a wonderful gift to science without price,
because through it he first saved the life he loved best. Isn't that
marvellous, grandfather?' And he said, 'Very marvellous, Ruth. Won't
you sit down and read to me about it?' And I said, 'I can't, dear
grandfather, because I have been away from grandmother all day, and
she is fretting for me, and to-night is a great ball, and she has spent
millions on my dress, I think, and there is an especial reason why I
must go, and so I have to see her now; but I want to show you the man's
face, and then you can read the story.'

"You see, I knew if I started to read it he would stop me; but if I left
him alone with it he would be so curious he would finish. So I turned
your name under and held the paper and said, 'What do you think of that
face, grandfather? Study it carefully,' and, Man, only guess what he
said! He said, 'I think it is the face of one of nature's noblemen.' I
just kissed him time and again and then I said, 'So it is grandfather,
so it is; for it is the face of the man who twice saved my life, and
lifted my mother from almost a pauper grave and laid her to rest
in state, and the man who found you, and sent me to you when I was
determined not to come.' And I just stood and kissed that paper before
him and cried, again and again, 'He is one of nature's noblemen, and he
is my husband, my dear, dear husband and to-morrow I am going home
to him.' Then I laid the paper on his lap and ran away. I went to
grandmother and did everything she wanted, then I dressed for the ball.
I went to say good-bye to her and show my dress and grandfather was
there, and he followed me out and said, 'Ruth, you didn't mean it?' I
said, 'Did you read the paper, grandfather?' and he said 'Yes'; and I
said, 'Then I should think you would know I mean it, and glory in my
wonderful luck. Think of a man like that, grandfather!'

"I went to the ball, and I danced and had a lovely time with every one,
because I knew it was going to be the very last, and to-morrow I must
start to you.

"On the way home I told Mr. Kennedy what paper to get and to read it. I
said good-bye to him, and I really think he cared, but I was too happy
to be very sorry. When I reached my room there was a packet for me and,
Man, like David of old, you are a wonderful poet! Oh Harvester! why
didn't you send them to me instead of the cold, hard things you wrote?"

"What do you mean, Ruth?"

"Those letters! Those wonderful outpourings of love and passion and
poetry and song and broken-heartedness. Oh Man, how could you write such
things and throw them in the fire? Granny Moreland found them when she
came to bring you a pie, and she carried them to Doctor Carey, and he
sent them to me, and, David, they finished me. Everything came in a
heap. I would have come without them, but never, never with quite the
understanding, for as I read them the deeps opened up, and the flood
broke, and there did a warm tide go through all my being, like you said
it would; and now, David, I know what you mean by love. I called
the maids and they packed my trunk and grandmother's, and I had
grandfather's valet pack his, and go and secure berths and tickets, and
learn about trains, and I got everything ready, even to the ambulance
and doctor; but I waited until morning to tell them. I knew they would
not let me come alone, so I brought them along. David, what in the world
are we going to do with them?"

The Harvester drew a deep breath and looked at the flushed face of the
Girl.

"With no time to mature a plan, I would say that we are going to love
them, care for them, gradually teach them our work, and interest them in
our plans here; and so soon as they become reconciled we will build them
such a house as they want on the hill facing us, just across Singing
Water, and there they may have every luxury they can provide for
themselves, or we can offer, and the pleasure of your presence, and both
of them can grow strong and happy. I'll have grandmother on her feet in
ten days, and the edge off grandfather's tongue in three. That bluster
of his is to drown tears, Ruth; I saw it to-night. And when they pass
over we will carry them up and lay them beside her under the oak, and
we can take the house we build for them, if you like it better, and use
this for a store-room."

"Never!" said the Girl. "Never! My sunshine room and gold garden so long
as I live. Never again will I leave them. If this cabin grows too small,
we will build all over the hillside; but my room and garden and this and
the dining-room and your den there must remain as they are now."

The Harvester arose and drew the davenport before the fireplace, and
heaped pillows. "You are so tired you are trembling, and your voice is
quivering," he said. He lifted the Girl, laid her down and arranged the
coverlet.

"Go to sleep!" he ordered gently. "You have made me so wildly happy that
I could run and shout like a madman. Try to rest, and maybe the fairies
who aid me will put my kiss back on your lips. I am going to the hill
top to tell mother and my God."

He knelt and gathered her in his arms a second, then called Belshazzar
to guard, and went into the sweet spring night, to jubilate with that
wild surge of passion that sweeps the heart of a strong man when he is
most nearly primal. He climbed the hill at a rush, and standing beneath
the oak on the summit, he faced the lake, and stretching his arms
widely, he waved them, merely to satisfy the demand for action. When
urgency for expression came upon him, he laughed a deep rumble of
exultation.

The night wind swept the lake and lifted his hair, the odour of spring
was intoxicating in his nostrils, small creatures of earth stirred
around him, here and there a bird, restless in the delirium of mating
fever, lifted its head and piped a few notes on the moon-whitened air.
The frogs sang uninterruptedly at the water's edge. The Harvester stood
rejoicing. Beating on his brain came a rush of love words uttered in the
Girl's dear voice. "I wanted you! Just you! He is my husband! My dear,
dear husband! To-morrow I am going home! Now, David, I know what you
mean by love!" The Harvester laughed again and sounds around him ceased
for a second, then swelled in fuller volume than before. He added his
voice. "Thank God! Oh, thank God!" he cried. "And may the Author of the
Universe, the spirits of the little mothers who loved us, and all the
good fairies who guide us, unite to bring unbounded joy to my Dream Girl
and to guard her safely."

The cocks of Medicine Woods began their second salute to dawn. At this
sound and with the mention of her name, the Harvester turned down the
hill, and striding forcefully approached the cabin. As he passed the
Girl's room he stepped softly, smiling as he wondered if its unexpected
occupants were resting. He followed Singing Water, and stood looking at
the hillside, studying the exact location most suitable for a home for
the old people he was so delighted to welcome. That they would remain
he never doubted. His faith in the call of the wild had been verified in
the Girl; it would reach them also. The hill top would bind them. Their
love for the Girl would compel them. They would be company for her and a
new interest in life.

"Couldn't be better, not possibly!" commented the delighted Harvester.

He followed the path down Singing Water until he reached the bridge
where it turned into the marsh. There he paused, looking straight ahead.

"Wonder if I would frighten her?" he mused. "I believe I'll risk it."

He walked on rapidly, vaulted the fence enclosing his land, crossed the
road, and unlatched the gate. As he did so, the door opened, and Granny
Moreland stood on the sill, waiting with keen eyes.

"Well I don't need neither specs nor noonday sun to see that you're
steppin' like the blue ribbon colt at the County Fair, and lookin' like
you owned Kingdom Come," she said. "What's up, David?"

"You are right, dear," said the Harvester. "I have entered my kingdom.
The Girl has come and crowned me with her love. She had decided to
return, but the letters you sent made her happier about it. I wanted you
to know."

Granny leaned against the casing, and began to sob unrestrainedly.

The Harvester supported her tenderly.

"Why don't do that, dear. Don't cry," he begged. "The Girl is home for
always, Granny, and I'm so happy I am out to-night trying to keep from
losing my mind with joy. She will come to you to-morrow, I know."

Granny tremulously dried her eyes.

"What an old sap-head I am!" she commented. "I stole your letters from
your fireplace, pitched a willer plate into the lake----you got to fish
that out, come day, David----fooled you into that trip to Doc Carey to
get him to mail them to Ruth, and never turned a hair. But after I got
home I commenced thinkin' 'twas a pretty ticklish job to stick your nose
into other people's business, an' every hour it got worse, until I ain't
had a fairly decent sleep since. If you hadn't come soon, boy, I'd 'a'
been sick a-bed. Oh, David! Are you sure she's over there, and loves you
to suit you now?"

"Yes dear, I am absolutely certain," said the Harvester. "She was so
determined to come that she brought the invalid grandmother she couldn't
leave and her grandfather. They arrived at midnight. We are all going to
live together now."

"Well bless my stars! Fetched you a family! David, I do hope to all
that's peaceful I hain't put my foot in it. The moon is the deceivingest
thing on earth I know, but does her family 'pear to be an a-gre'-able
family, by its light?"

The Harvester's laugh boomed a half mile down the road.

"Finest people on earth, next to you, dear. I'm mighty glad to have
them. I'm going to build them a house on my best location, and we are
all going to be happy from now on. Go to bed! This night air may chill
you. I can't sleep. I wanted you to know first----so I came over. In
mother's stead, will you kiss me, and wish me happiness, dear friend?"

Granny Moreland laid an eager, withered hand on each shoulder, and bent
to the radiant young face.

"God bless you, lad, and grant you as great happiness as life ort to
fetch every clean, honest man," she prayed fervently, with closed eyes
and her lined old face turned skyward. "And, O God, bless Ruth, and help
her as You never helped mortal woman before to know her own mind without
'variableness, neither shadow of turnin'.'"

The Harvester was on Singing Water bridge before he gave way. There he
laughed as never before in his life. Finally he controlled himself
and started toward the cabin; but he was chuckling as he passed the
driveway, and walked down the broad cement floor leading to his bathing
pool, where the moonlight bridged the lake, and fell as a benediction
all around him.

He stood a long time, when he recognized the familiar crash of a
breaking backlog falling together, and heard the customary leap of the
frightened dog. He walked to his door and listened intently, but there
was no sound; so he decided the Girl had not been awakened. In the midst
of a whitening sheet of gold the Harvester dropped to his stoop and
leaned his head against the broad casing. He broke a twig from a
hawthorn bush beside him, and sat twisting it in his fingers as
he stared down the line of the gold bridge. Never had it seemed so
material, so like a path that might be trodden by mortal feet and lead
them straight to Heaven. As on the hill top, night again surrounded him
and the Harvester's soul drank deep wild draughts of a new joy. Sleep
was out of the question. He was too intensely alive to know that he ever
again could be weary. He sat there in the moonlight, and with unbridled
heart gloried in the joy that had come to him.

He turned his face from the bridge as he heard the click of Belshazzar's
nails on the floor of the bathing pool. Then his heart and breath
stopped an instant. Beside the dog walked the Girl, one hand on his head
the other holding the flowing white robe around her and grasping one of
the Harvester's lilies. His first thought was sheer amazement that she
was not afraid, for it was evident now that the backlog had awakened
her, and she had taken the dog and gone to her mother. Then she had
followed the path leading down the hill, around the cabin, and into the
sheet of moonlight gilding the shore. She stood there gazing over
the lake, oblivious to all things save the entrancing allurement of
a perfect spring night beside undulant water. Screened from her with
bushes and trees the Harvester scarcely breathed lest he startle her.
Then his head swam, and his still heart leaped wildly. She was coming
toward him. On her left lay the path to the hill top. A few steps
farther she could turn to the right and follow the driveway to the front
of the cabin. He leaned forward watching in an agony of suspense. Her
beautiful face was transfigured with joy, aflame with love, radiant with
smiles, and her tall figure fleecy white, rimmed in gold. Up the shining
path of light she steadily advanced toward his door. Then the Harvester
understood, and from his exultant heart burst the wordless petition:

"LORD GOD ALMIGHTY, HELP ME TO BE A MAN!"

With outstretched arms he arose to meet her.

"My Dream Girl!" he cried hoarsely. "My Dream Girl!"

"Coming, Harvester!" she answered in tones of joy, as she dropped the
white flower and lifted her hands to draw his face toward her.

"Is that the kiss you wanted?" she questioned.

"Yes, Ruth," breathed the Harvester.

"Then I am ready to be your wife," she said. "May I share all the
remainder of life's joys and sorrows with you?"

The Harvester gathered her in his arms and carried her to the bench on
the lake shore. He wrapped the white robe around her and clasped her
tenderly as behooved a lover, yet with arms that she knew could have
crushed her had they willed. The minutes slipped away, and still he held
her to his heart, the reality far surpassing his dream; for he knew that
he was awake, and he realized this as the supreme hour that comes to the
strongman who knows his love requited.

When the first banner of red light arose above Medicine Woods and
Singing Water the cocks on the hillside announced the dawn. As the gold
faded to gray, a burst of bubbling notes swelled from a branch almost
over their heads where stood a bark-enclosed little house.

"Ruth, do you hear that?" asked the Harvester softly.

"Yes," she answered, "and I see it. A wonderful bird, with Heaven's
deepest blue on its back and a breast like a russet autumn leaf, came
straight up the lake from the south, and before it touched the limb that
song seemed to gush from its throat."

"And for that reason, the greatest nature lover who ever lived says
that it 'deserves preeminence.' It always settles from its long voyage
through the air in an ecstasy of melody. Do you know what it is, Ruth?"

The Girl laid a hand on his cheek and turned his eyes from the bird to
her face as she answered, "Yes, Harvester-man, I know. It is your first
bluebird----but it is far too late, and Belshazzar has lost high office.
I have usurped both their positions. You remain in the woods and reap
their harvest, you enter the laboratory and make wonderful, life-giving
medicines, you face the world and tell men of the high and holy life
they may live if they will, and then----always and forever, you come
back to Medicine Woods and to me, Harvester."





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Harvester, by Gene Stratton Porter

*** 